Eltroxin, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Eltroxin Tablets You are here: Home Eltroxin Tablets Eltroxin (Levothyroxine) is used to treat an under active thyroid which is not producing enough thyroxine. Why have I been prescribed Eltroxin? Eltroxin (Levothyroxine) is used to treat an under active thyroid which is not producing enough thyroxine. How does it work? Eltroxin contains levothyroxine sodium which is a synthetic form of the hormone thyroxine. Not enough thyroxine is produced naturally in hypothyroidism so Eltroxin supplements the levels in the body. When and how do I take it? Always take Eltroxin Tablets exactly as your doctor has told you. Do NOT take more than your doctor tells you to. You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. Swallow the tablets with a glass of water, preferably before breakfast. What’s the dose? The usual staring dose for adults is 50 to 100 micrograms daily. This may be adjusted after a few weeks depending on the response to your treatment which will be monitored by blood tests. For patients over 50 years the starting dose will not usually exceed 50 micrograms. For infants and children the starting dose will not usually exceed 25 micrograms. In the event of stopping treatment, Eltroxin tablets should be withdrawn gradually under the supervision of your doctor. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. The effects of these medicines may change, especially if you are taking: medicines called cardiac glycosides (e.g. digoxin) used to treat heart conditions such as&nbsp;heart failure insulin and other treatments for diabetes colestyramine, which reducee the level of cholesterol (fat) in the blood calcium salts (used to treat low levels of calcium in your blood) rifampicin, used to treat infections iron preparations cimetidine, used to treat excess acid in the stomach beat-blockers (e.g. propranolol) used to treat high blood pressure anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine) used to prevent fits anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin ) used to thin the blood and treat blood clots tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline) used to treat depression oral contraceptives (“the pill”) Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Eltroxin tablets can sometimes cause side effects, although not&nbsp;everybody gets them. The following effects can occur if your initial dose of the medicine is to high: diarrhoea Tremor (shaking), restlessness, excitability Difficulty sleeping Rapid heart beat or angina (pain in the chest on exercise) You should consult your doctor if any of the above effects occur. The effects usually go away when the dose has been changed. Other side effects you could experience are: Irregular heart beats, palpitations (thumping heart beats) Muscle cramps or weakness Vomiting Headaches , flushing, sweating Loss of weight If any of the side effects become serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Levothyroxine sodium. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? If you are pregnant or planning to become pregnant or are breast-feeding discuss your medication with your doctor. The decision on whether it is best to take Eltroxin tablets during pregnancy or breast feeding will be made by your doctor. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicines. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levothyroxine http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/~db5_Ob4607574e1e648c485e74972fa41e90f-2141875-13012014104451-635252066936303750.pdf http://www.medbroadcast.com/drug/getdrug/Eltroxin http://www.drugs.com/sfx/eltroxin-side-effects.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/22561/SPC/Eltroxin+100mcg+tablets/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypothyroidism Print This Page More Videos... What is Lupus Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) Health Reference Hypothyroidism Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin