Betaloc, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betaloc You are here: Home Betaloc Betaloc (Metoprolol) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension), gripping chest pain due to insufficient oxygen for the heart (angina pectoris), and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Betaloc can also be used with other drugs in the treatment of other conditions. Why have I been prescribed Betaloc? Betaloc (Metoprolol) is used to treat high blood pressure ( hypertension ), gripping chest pain due to insufficient oxygen for the heart ( angina pectoris ), and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Betaloc can also be used with other drugs in the treatment of an overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ), in the early treatment of heart&nbsp;attacks and the prevention of further attacks, and to help to prevent migraine. How does it work? Betaloc reduces the workload of the heart by counteracting the effect of adrenaline and slowing down the heart. When and how do I take it? Betaloc should be taken on an empty stomach . Alcohol or food when taken with Betaloc will increase the&nbsp;levels of metoprolol (the active ingredient) in your blood. This may therefore increase the effect of your medicine. Your doctor will tell you how many tablets to take and when to take them. What’s the dose? High blood pressure (hypertension): The usual dose is 100 mg to 200 mg a day, although doses up to 400 mg a day have been used. You may&nbsp;be asked to take your tablets either once a day in the morning, or twice a day in the morning and evening. You&nbsp;will usually start on 50 mg twice a day, or 100 mg once a day. The dose may then be increased if necessary, by&nbsp;your doctor, depending on your individual response. If needed, your doctor may also combine your Betaloc with&nbsp;other medicines that are used to lower blood pressure. Long term treatment with Betaloc in daily doses of&nbsp;100–200 mg has been shown to reduce the risk of complications due to high blood pressure, such as&nbsp;stroke, myocardial infarction ( heart attack ), and sudden cardiovascular death. Gripping chest pain (angina pectoris): The usual dose is 100–200 mg daily, taken in the morning and evening, although doses up to 300 mg a day have&nbsp;been used. You will usually start on 50 mg twice a day. The dose may then be increased if necessary, by your&nbsp;doctor, depending on your individual response. If needed, your doctor may also combine your Betaloc with other&nbsp;medicines that are used to lower blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia): The usual dose is 100–200 mg daily, taken in the morning and the evening. Overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism): The usual dose is 50 mg four times a day. Following a heart attack (Myocardial Infarction): Treatment with Betaloc may start with injections. You will usually then take 50 mg four times a day for two days,&nbsp;then your treatment dosage may be changed. To help to prevent migraine: The usual dose is 100 mg to 200 mg a day taken in the morning and evening. If you are unsure about anything don’t guess, ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice. Could it interact with other tablets? Betaloc can affect the way some other medicines work and some medicines can have an effect on Betaloc. The following medicines can cause some problems if you take them with Betaloc: certain drugs used in the treatment of the heart and blood vessels such as digitalis/digoxin, calcium antagonists (like verapamil, diltiazem and nifedipine), antiarrhythmic agents (such as quinidine and amiodarone), sympathetic ganglion blocking agents or hydralazine. monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors. inhalation anaesthetics. antibacterial drugs such as rifampicin. antiinflammatory drugs such as indometacin (for pain and inflammation). certain antidepressive agents such as tricyclic antidepressants, and antipsychotic medicines. antihistamines. other beta-blockers used as eye drops. other substances such as alcohol, some hormones, enzyme-inducing and enzyme-inhibiting substances. clonidine. If you are taking clonidine and Betaloc at the same time, you must not stop taking clonidine unless your doctor tells you to do so. If you have to stop taking clonidine or Betaloc your doctor will give you careful instructions on how to do so. oral antidiabetic medicine or insulin. Your doctor may need to adjust your dose of these medicines. lidocaine. barbiturates. phenothiazines. ergotamine. adrenaline (epinephrine). If you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including any you buy or use without a prescription, you should tell your doctor. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Betaloc can have side effects. The following undesirable effects have been reported in&nbsp;patients treated with Betaloc. If you suffer from any of these reactions, and they continue, be sure to tell your&nbsp;doctor. Very common event (≥10%): Fatigue. Common events (1–9.9%): Dizziness headache slow heart rate dizziness related to change of position of the body (rarely with fainting) cold hands and feet feeling sick (nausea) stomachache diarrhoea constipation shortness of breath on effort feeling of heart pounding in the chest Can I drink alcohol while taking it? This medicine interacts with alcohol and concomitant use should be avoided. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Betaloc should not be used in pregnancy or nursing mothers unless the physician considers that the benefit outweighs the possible hazard to the foetus/infant The amount of metoprolol ingested via breast milk should not produce significant beta-blocking effects in the neonate if the mother is treated with the normal therapeutic doses. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metoprolol http://www.medbroadcast.com/Drug/GetDrug/Betaloc http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Betaloc-Tablets.aspx http://www.medsafe.govt.nz/consumers/cmi/b/betalocCR.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension , Hyperthyroidism Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Hyperthyroidism Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin