Cold & Flu | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cold &amp; Flu You are here: Home Cold &amp; Flu Influenza is a viral infection that attacks your respiratory system, including your nose, throat, bronchial tubes and lungs. What is it? Influenza is a viral infection that attacks your respiratory system, including your nose, throat, bronchial tubes and lungs. If you're generally healthy and you catch influenza — commonly called the flu — you're likely to feel rotten for a few days, but you probably won't develop complications or need hospital care. If you have a weakened immune system or chronic illness, though, influenza can be fatal. For those at high risk of influenza, the first line of defense is an annual flu shot. This year, in addition to a regular flu shot, you may need a different flu shot for protection against novel H1N1 swine flu, a new type of influenza identified earlier this year. The first doses of swine flu vaccine will be available later this fall, after seasonal flu immunization begins. Symptoms Initially, the flu may seem like a common cold with a runny nose, sneezing and sore throat. But colds usually develop slowly, whereas the flu tends to come on suddenly. And although a cold can be a nuisance, you usually feel much worse with the flu. Common signs and symptoms of the flu include: Fever over 101 F (38 C) in adults, and often as high as 103 to 105 F (39.5 C to 40.5 C) in children Chills and sweats Headache Dry cough Muscular aches and pains, especially in your back, arms and legs Fatigue and weakness Nasal congestion Loss of appetite Diarrhoea and vomiting in children Causes Flu viruses travel through the air in droplets when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks. You can inhale the droplets directly, or you can pick up the germs from an object, such as a telephone or computer keyboard, and then transfer them to your eyes, nose or mouth. The flu is caused by three types (strains) of viruses — influenza A, B and C. Type A can be responsible for the deadly influenza pandemics (worldwide epidemics) that strike every 10 to 40 years. Type B can lead to smaller, more localized outbreaks. And either types A or B can cause the flu that circulates almost every winter. Type C has never been connected with a large epidemic. Type C is a fairly stable virus, but types A and B are constantly changing, with new strains appearing regularly. Once you've had the flu, you develop antibodies to the strain that caused it, but those antibodies won't protect you from new strains. That's why doctors recommend getting a flu shot every year. Risk factors You're at increased risk of influenza or its complications if you: Are an infant or young child Are over age 50 Are a resident of a nursing home or other long term care facility Have a chronic disorder, such as diabetes or heart, kidney or lung disease Have a weakened immune system, such as from medications or HIV infection Will be pregnant during flu season Work in a health care facility where you're more likely to be exposed to the flu virus Are in regular, close contact with infants or young children Children on long-term aspirin therapy also may be at greater risk. The flu vaccine is safe for children 6 months and older. If your child isn't at risk of the flu but lives with someone who is, you still may want to have your child vaccinated. That way, your child is less likely to infect others. The more people immunized, the less likely it is that the flu will spread through a community. Complications If you're young and healthy, influenza usually isn't serious. Although you may feel miserable while you have it, the flu usually goes away with no lasting effects. But high-risk children and adults may develop complications such as: Ear infections Acute sinusitis Bronchitis Pneumonia Encephalitis Of these, pneumococcal pneumonia, a serious bacterial infection of the lungs, is the most common and most serious. For older adults and people with a chronic illness, pneumonia can be deadly. The best protection is vaccination against both pneumococcal pneumonia and influenza. References: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Influenza http://www.cdc.gov/flu/ http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/influenza/DS00081 http://www.news-medical.net/health/Influenza-What-is-Influenza.aspx http://www.who.int/influenza/en/ Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Paracetamol for Adults Paracetamol for Children - Calpol/Paralink Ibuprofen (Nurofen/Melfen/Brufen) Tablets Ibuprofen for Children from 3 months plus Cough Medicine Reference Brufen Retard Tablets Brufen Syrup Brufen Tablets Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Melfen Tablets (Ibuprofen) Nurofen for Children (OTC) Nurofen for Children Meltlets (OTC) Nurofen for Children Suppositories (OTC) Nurofen Liquid Capsules (OTC) Nurofen Plus Tablets Nurofen Tablets (OTC) Panadol (OTC) Paracetamol Panadol Extra (OTC) Anadin Paracetamol (OTC) Paracetamol Paralink Suppositories 180mg (OTC) Paratabs (OTC) Paracetamol Calpol Sugar Free (OTC) Calpol Suspension (OTC) Zinc Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin