Night terrors | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Night terrors You are here: Home Night terrors Night terrors are episodes of fear, flailing and screaming while asleep. Night terrors often are paired with sleepwalking. What is it? Night terrors are episodes of fear, flailing and screaming while asleep. Night terrors are often paired with sleepwalking. Although night terrors are more common in children, they also can affect adults. A night terror episode usually lasts only a few minutes. Night terrors are relatively rare, affecting only a small percentage of children — often between ages 4 and 12 — and a smaller percentage of adults. However frightening, night terrors aren't usually a cause for concern. Most children outgrow night terrors by adolescence. Symptoms Night terrors differ from nightmares. Whereas the dreamer of a nightmare wakes up from the dream and remembers details, people with night terrors remain asleep. Children usually don't remember anything about their night terrors in the morning. Adults may recall a dream fragment they had during the night terrors. Like sleepwalking and nightmares, night terrors are a parasomnia — an undesired occurrence during sleep. Night terrors usually occur during the first third of the sleep period for children. For adults, night terrors can happen anytime during the night. During a night terror episode, a person might: Sit up in bed Scream or shout Kick and thrash Sweat, breathe heavily and have a racing pulse Be hard to awaken Get out of bed and run around the house (more common in adults) Engage in violent behavior (more common in adults) Stare wide-eyed Causes Various factors can contribute to night terrors, including: Sleep deprivation Fatigue Stress Anxiety Fever Sleeping in unfamiliar surroundings Night terrors sometimes are associated with underlying conditions that affect sleep, such as: Seizure disorders Sleep-disordered breathing — a group of disorders characterized by abnormal breathing patterns during sleep, the most common of which is obstructive sleep apnea Migraines Stroke Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) Head injuries or brain swelling Premenstrual period In other cases, use of alcohol, illicit drugs or certain medications — including some antibiotics, antihistamines, sedatives and sleeping pills — can trigger night terror episodes. Risk factors Night terrors tend to run in families. Adults who have night terrors may have a history of bipolar disorder or some depressive or anxiety disorders, although it's unclear how strong the association is. Complications Night terrors aren't necessarily a concern, but regularly disrupted sleep can be. It can cause excessive daytime sleepiness, which can lead to difficulties at school or work, or problems with everyday tasks such as driving. Harming self or others is another possible complication during night terrors. Diagnosis Night terrors are usually self-diagnosed. Your doctor may do a physical or psychological exam to identify any conditions that may be contributing to the night terrors. In some cases, observation or tests in an overnight sleep lab may be recommended. References http://www.webmd.com/sleep-disorders/night-terrors http://www.healthline.com/health/night-terrors http://www.emedicinehealth.com/night_terrors/article_em.htm http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/night-terrors/basics/definition/con-20032552 Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... When to call the GP - For the Parents of Baby&#039;s Medicine Reference Imipramine Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin