Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Anhydrol Forte Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Anhydrol Forte You are here: Home Anhydrol Forte For the topical treatment of hyperhidrosis specifically involving axillae, hands or feet. What is it used for? Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) of the armpits, hands or feet. How does it work? Anhydrol forte contains aluminium chloride hexahydrate. Aluminium chloride is an antiperspirant that stops you sweating. When you apply Anhydrol forte to the skin, the aluminium chloride works by blocking the sweat glands. This causes the pressure of fluid within the sweat glands to rise to the point where they temporarily stop sweat production. The product is applied before going to bed at night in order to block the sweat glands while they are least active. It should then be washed off in the morning. The sweat glands will then remain blocked and so will not produce sweat during the day. (The sweat glands unblock as the dead cells on the surface of the skin are naturally shed.) How do I use it? Do not shake the bottle. Anhydrol forte should be applied to before going to bed at night and allowed to dry naturally. It should be washed off with soap and water in the morning. Do not re-apply it in the morning. You can continue using your normal deodorant or perfume in the day if you want to, but don't use other antiperspirants as well. To begin with you should apply Anhydrol forte for two nights in a row, then don't use it for the next two nights. Repeat this cycle for as long as necessary. It is fine to apply it more or less frequently until you achieve the desired effect, but bear in mind that if your skin is getting irritated you are probably using it too often. Make sure the skin is completely dry and unbroken before application. To make sure the skin is dry you should not bath or shower immediately before applying Anhydrol forte. Don't apply too much as this can irritate the skin. Warning! Anhydrol forte is for external use on the skin only. Do not apply it to broken or irritated skin. Avoid getting the product in the eyes or on mucous membranes such as the mouth, nasal passages or genitals. You should only use this product on your armpits, hands or feet. Do not use it on other areas as well, because sweating is an important function for controlling your body temperature. Do not shave or use depilatories on the area of skin being treated within 12 hours before or after applying Anhydrol. Avoid getting Anhydrol forte in direct contact with clothing, polished surfaces, jewellery and metal, as it may damage or discolour them. This product contains alcohol and so is flammable. Store below 25°C and keep away from naked flames. Not to be used in Known sensitivity or allergy to any ingredient. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. There are no known harmful effects when this antiperspirant is used by pregnant or breastfeeding mothers. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Irritation or redness of the skin at the site of application. If you experience this, try applying the product less often. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. References: https://www.drugs.com/uk/anhydrol-forte-20-w-v-cutaneous-solution-leaflet.html https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a6214/anhydrol-forte/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/3749/smpc http://www.irishhealth.com/discussion/message.html?dis=1&amp;topic=53 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin