Cataflam, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cataflam Tablets You are here: Home Cataflam Tablets Cataflam (diclofenac potassium) is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Diclofenac works by reducing substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation. What is Cataflam? Cataflam (diclofenac potassium) is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Diclofenac works by reducing substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation. Cataflam is used to treat mild to moderate pain, or signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis . Cataflam is also used to treat menstrual cramps. How should I take Cataflam? Take Cataflam exactly as directed on the label, or as prescribed by your doctor. Your doctor may occasionally change your dose to make sure you get the best results. Do not take this medicine in larger amounts or for longer than recommended. Use the lowest dose that is effective in treating your condition. For treatment of pain or primary dysmenorrhea the recommended dosage of Cataflam is 50 mg three times daily. In some patients an initial dose of 100 mg of Cataflam, followed by 50 mg doses, may provide better relief. For the relief of osteoarthritis the recommended dosage of Cataflam is 100-150 mg/day in divided doses, i.e. 50 mg two or three times a day. For the relief of rheumatoid arthritis the recommended dosage is 150-200 mg/day in divided doses, i.e. 50 mg three or four times a day. Different formulations of diclofenac, Voltaren (diclofenac sodium tablets) and Cataflam (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) are not necessarily equivalent in strength even if the milligram strength is the same. If you use Cataflam long-term, you may need frequent medical tests. Store at room temperature away from moisture and heat. Keep the bottle tightly closed when not in use. Read all patient information, medication guides, and instruction sheets provided to you. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. What happens if I miss a dose? Take the missed dose as soon as you remember. Skip the missed dose if it is almost time for your next scheduled dose. Do not take extra medicine to make up the missed dose. Side effects Get emergency medical help if you have signs of an allergic reaction to Cataflam: sneezing, runny or stuffy nose; wheezing or trouble breathing; hives; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Get emergency medical help if you have signs of a heart attack or stroke: chest pain spreading to your jaw or shoulder, sudden numbness or weakness on one side of the body, slurred speech, feeling short of breath. Stop using Cataflam and call your doctor at once if you have: the first sign of any skin rash, no matter how mild; shortness of breath (even with mild exertion); swelling or rapid weight gain; signs of stomach bleeding - bloody or tarry stools, coughing up blood or vomit that looks like coffee grounds; liver problems - nausea, upper stomach pain, itching, tired feeling, flu-like symptoms, loss of appetite, dark urine, clay-colored stools, jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes); kidney problems - little or no urinating, painful or difficult urination, swelling in your feet or ankles, feeling tired or short of breath; high blood pressure - severe headache, pounding in your neck or ears, nosebleed, anxiety , confusion; low red blood cells ( anaemia ) - pale skin, feeling light-headed or short of breath, rapid heart rate, trouble concentrating; or severe skin reaction - fever , sore throat, swelling in your face or tongue, burning in your eyes, skin pain followed by a red or purple skin rash that spreads (especially in the face or upper body) and causes blistering and peeling. Common Cataflam side effects may include: indigestion, gas, stomach pain, nausea, vomiting; diarrhoea, constipation; headache , dizziness, drowsiness; stuffy nose; itching , increased sweating; increased blood pressure; or swelling or pain in your arms or legs. What other drugs will affect Cataflam? Ask your doctor before using Cataflam if you take an antidepressant such as citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline (Zoloft), trazodone, or vilazodone. Taking any of these medicines with an NSAID may cause you to bruise or bleed easily. Tell your doctor about all your current medicines and any you start or stop using, especially : cyclosporine; lithium; methotrexate ; rifampin; antifungal medicine; a blood thinner ( warfarin , Coumadin, Jantoven); heart or blood pressure medication, including a diuretic or "water pill"; other forms of diclofenac (Flector, Pennsaid, Solaraze, Voltaren Gel); other NSAIDs - aspirin , ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve), celecoxib (Celebrex), indomethacin, meloxicam, and others; or steroid medicine (prednisone and others). This list is not complete. Other drugs may interact with diclofenac, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal products. Not all possible interactions are listed in this medication guide. Dosage Carefully consider the potential benefits and risks of Cataflam® (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) and other treatment options before deciding to use Cataflam (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) . Use the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration consistent with individual patient treatment goals (see WARNINGS). After observing the response to initial therapy with Cataflam (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) , the dose and frequency should be adjusted to suit an individual patient's needs. For treatment of pain or primary dysmenorrhea the recommended dosage is 50 mg three times daily. With experience, physicians may find that in some patients an initial dose of 100 mg of Cataflam (diclofenac potassium immediate-release tablets) , followed by 50-mg doses, will provide better relief. For the relief of osteoarthritis the recommended dosage is 100-150 mg/day in divided doses, 50 mg twice daily or three times daily. For the relief of rheumatoid arthritis the recommended dosage is 150-200 mg/day in divided doses, 50 mg three times daily or four times daily. Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Diclofenac Pregnancy Warnings Administration of NSAIDs during the latter part of pregnancy may cause premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus, fetal renal impairment, inhibition of platelet aggregation, and delay labor and delivery. There are no adequate and well controlled studies of diclofenac or other NSAIDs in pregnant women. The use of drugs known to inhibit cyclooxygenase/prostaglandin synthesis may impair femalefertility. AU TGA pregnancy category C: Drugs which, owing to their pharmacological effects, have caused or may be suspected of causing, harmful effects on the human fetus or neonate without causing malformations. These effects may be reversible. Accompanying texts should be consulted for further details. US FDA pregnancy category C: Animal reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect on the fetus and there are no adequate and well-controlled studies in humans, but potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks. US FDA pregnancy category D: There is positive evidence of human fetal risk based on adverse reaction data from investigational or marketing experience or studies in humans, but potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks. Not recommended during last trimester of pregnancy Prior to 30 weeks gestation, use only if potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus AU TGA pregnancy category: C US FDA pregnancy category: C prior to 30 weeks gestation US FDA pregnancy category: D starting at 30 weeks gestation. Diclofenac Breastfeeding Warnings Use is not recommended Excreted into human milk: Yes The effects in the nursing infant are unknown. The data on excretion into breast milk is limited. One women receiving 150 mg daily had milk levels of 100 mcg/L, equivalent to an infant dose of about 0.03 mg/kg/day. Six mothers receiving 100 mg orally daily for 1 week postpartum had undetectable levels in their milk. While it does appear to pass in small amounts, some experts consider this drug to be acceptable during breast feeding, however other agents have more published information and may be preferred, especially when nursing a newborn or preterm infant. &nbsp; If you have any other questions please contact your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://patient.info/medicine/diclofenac-for-pain-and-inflammation http://www.drugs.com/pregnancy/diclofenac.html http://www.rxlist.com/cataflam-drug/indications-dosage.htm https://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/Cataflam.pdf http://www.medicinenet.com/diclofenac/article.htm &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Osteoarthritis , Rheumatoid Arthritis Print This Page Health Reference Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid Arthritis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin