Costochondritis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Costochondritis You are here: Home Costochondritis Costochondritis is an inflammation of the cartilage that connects a rib to the breastbone (sternum). It causes sharp pain in the costosternal joint — where your ribs and breastbone are joined by rubbery cartilage. What is it? Pain caused by costochondritis may mimic that of a heart attack or other heart conditions. Your doctor might refer to costochondritis by other names, including chest wall pain, costosternal syndrome and costosternal chondrodynia. When the pain of costochondritis is accompanied by swelling, it's referred to as Tietze syndrome. Most cases of costochondritis have no apparent cause. In these cases, treatment focuses on easing your pain while you wait for costochondritis to improve on its own. Symptoms Costochondritis is the most common cause of chest pain originating in the chest wall. Symptoms include: Pain and tenderness in the locations where your ribs attach to your breastbone (costosternal joints) Often sharp pain, though also dull and gnawing pain Location often on left side of breastbone, but possible on either side of chest Other costochondritis symptoms may include: Pain when taking deep breaths Pain when coughing Difficulty breathing Causes Doctors don't know what causes most cases of costochondritis. Only some cases of costochondritis have a clear cause. Those causes include: Injury. A blow to the chest could cause costochondritis. Physical strain. Heavy lifting and strenuous exercise have been linked to costochondritis. Upper respiratory illness. An infection that produces sneezing or a cough may produce costochondritis. Infection. Infection can develop in the costosternal joint, causing pain. Fibromyalgia. Recurring costochondritis could be a symptom of fibromyalgia. People with fibromyalgia often have several tender spots. The upper part of the breastbone is a common tender spot. Pain from other areas of your body. Pain signals can sometimes be misinterpreted by your brain, causing pain in places far away from where the problem occurs. Your doctor might refer to this as "referred pain." Pain in your chest can sometimes be caused by problems with the bones in your spine compressing the nerves. Risk factors Costochondritis occurs most often in women and in people older than 40. However, costochondritis can affect anyone, including infants and children. Tests and diagnosis Your doctor will conduct a physical exam to diagnose costochondritis. He or she will ask you to describe your pain and what influences it. The pain of costochondritis can be very similar to the pain associated with heart disease, lung disease, gastrointestinal problems and osteoarthritis. Your doctor will feel along your breastbone for areas of tenderness or swelling. Costochondritis generally can't be seen on chest X-rays or other imaging tests used to see inside your body. Sometimes your doctor orders these tests or others to rule out other conditions. Treatments and drugs Costochondritis usually goes away on its own and is short-lived, although in some cases it may last for several months or longer. To ease your pain until it fades, your doctor may recommend: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and naproxen Antidepressants, specifically a category of medicines called tricyclic antidepressants, if pain is making it difficult to sleep at night Muscle relaxants, which can also help ease pain Lifestyle remedies It can be frustrating to know that there's little your doctor can do to treat your costochondritis. But you can take self-care measures to make yourself more comfortable, which can give you a greater sense of control over your condition. To help relieve the pain of costochondritis, try to: Rest. Avoid activities that make your pain worse. Exercise. It may seem contradictory to rest, but gentle exercises, such as walking or swimming, can improve your mood and keep your body healthy. Don't overdo it, and stop if exercise increases your pain. Use a heating pad. Apply a heating pad to the painful area several times a day. Keep the heat on a low setting. Once your pain is gone, continue taking it easy. Slowly work your way back to your normal activities. Prevention Although the cause of costochondritis is often unknown, there's some evidence that children who carry a heavy school bag, especially over one shoulder, are at increased risk of this condition. Upper respiratory infections, heavy lifting and strenuous exercise also may be linked to costochondritis. Common-sense preventive steps that may reduce the risk of costochondritis and protect you and your family's overall health include: Encourage your child to use school bags properly. Make sure your child's bag is not so heavy that your child's shoulders slump, and show your child how to carry the bag appropriately. Avoid activities that seem to trigger costochondritis-like pain. If chest pain and tenderness seem to result from physical exertion, ask your doctor to provide safe guidelines for your exercise program and for lifting. Take steps to prevent respiratory infection. Wash your hands thoroughly and often, avoid sharing drinking glasses or utensils with others and limit your exposure to people who are ill. References: https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000164.htm http://www.emedicinehealth.com/costochondritis/article_em.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Costochondritis &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Advil Liquigels (OTC) (Ibuprofen) Affex Amitriptyline Anafranil Anxicalm Arthrotec Ciprager Tablets - Citalopram Cipramil Tablets - Citalopram Cymbalta Capsules Diclac Gel Diclac Suppositories Difene - (Diclofenac Sodium) Difene Suppositories Efexor Capsules - Venlafaxine Efexor XL Capsules Gamanil 70mg Tablets Imipramine Mianserin Molipaxin Capsules Naprosyn EC Prothiaden Tablets/Capsules Surmontil Capsules Valdoxan Tablets Voltarol (Diclofenac) Tablets Zispin Tablets - (Mirtazapine) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin