Advil Ibuprofen Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Advil Liquigels (OTC) (Ibuprofen) You are here: Home Advil Liquigels (OTC) (Ibuprofen) Ibuprofen helps to reduce inflammation and to reduce pain. Ibuprofen can take a few weeks to help improve inflammation but can start to relieve pain after the first few doses. Why have I been prescribed Ibuprofen? Ibuprofen helps to reduce inflammation and to reduce pain. Ibuprofen can take a few weeks to help improve inflammation but can start to relieve pain after the first few doses. How does it work? Ibuprofen works by blocking the production of some of the body chemicals that cause inflammation, pain, stiffness, tenderness, swelling and increased temperature. When and how do I take it? Take up to three times a day with food. What’s the dose? Adults and children over 12 years: Initial dose is 400mg and subsequently if necessary, 200 to 400mg every four hours with a maximum of 1200mg in a 24 hour period. Not suitable for children under 12 years of age. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or pharmacist. You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Ibuprofen: aspirin ciclosporin lithium methotrexate mifepristone tacrolimus warfarin zidovudine The following types of medicine may interact with Ibuprofen: aminoglycosides anticoagulants antihypertensives antiplatelets cardiac glycosides corticosteroids COX-2 inhibitors diuretics non-steroidal anti-inflammatories quinolones selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors If you are taking Ibuprofen and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? The most likely side effects are:&nbsp; dyspepsia ( heart burn ) gastrointestinal intolerance and bleeding Skin rashes pruritus erythema urticaria maculopapular rash and other allergic reactions have been reported Very rarely erythema multiforme has been reported Thrombocytopenia has also been reported Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Ibuprofen Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? The use of this medicine during pregnancy is not recommended. You should only take this medicine during pregnancy if your doctor thinks that you need it. Breast-feeding is not recommended while taking this medicine. You should only take this medicine and breast-feed on the advice of your prescriber If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.medicinenet.com/ibuprofen/article.htm http://www.drugs.com/ibuprofen.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibuprofen http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Painkillers-ibuprofen/Pages/Introduction.aspx &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin