Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Elvina Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Elvina You are here: Home Elvina Elvina (drospirenone and ethinyl estradiol) prevents ovulation (the release of an egg from an ovary) and also cause changes in your cervical and uterine lining, making it harder for sperm to reach the uterus and harder for a fertilized egg to attach to the uterus. What is Elvina? Elvina (drospirenone and ethinyl estradiol) prevents ovulation (the release of an egg from an ovary) and also cause changes in your cervical and uterine lining, making it harder for sperm to reach the uterus and harder for a fertilized egg to attach to the uterus. Elvina is used in women as a contraceptive to prevent pregnancy. Elvina may also be used for purposes not listed in this medication guide. Important information Do not use Elvina if you are pregnant or if you have recently had a baby. You should not take Elvina if you have any of the following conditions: uncontrolled&nbsp; high blood pressure ,&nbsp; heart disease , a blood-clotting disorder, circulation problems,&nbsp; diabetic &nbsp;problems with your eyes or kidneys, unusual vaginal bleeding, liver disease or&nbsp; liver cancer , severe&nbsp; migraine &nbsp;headaches, if you smoke and are over 35, or if you have ever had breast or uterine&nbsp; cancer ,&nbsp; jaundice &nbsp;caused by birth control pills, a&nbsp; heart attack , a&nbsp; stroke , or a blood clot. Taking Elvina can increase your risk of blood clots, stroke, or heart attack, especially if you have certain other conditions, or if you are&nbsp; overweight . Smoking can greatly increase your risk of blood clots, stroke, or heart attack. You should not take Yasmin if you smoke and are over 35 years old. Before taking Elvina Taking Elvina can increase your risk of blood clots, stroke, or heart attack. You are even more at risk if you have high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol, or if you are overweight. Your risk of stroke or blood clot is highest during your first year of taking birth control pills. Your risk is also high when you restart Elvina after not taking them for 4 weeks or longer. Smoking can greatly increase your risk of blood clots, stroke, or heart attack. Your risk increases the older you are and the more you smoke. You should not take combination birth control pills if you smoke and are over 35 years old. Do not use if you are pregnant. Stop taking Yasmin and tell your doctor if you become pregnant, or if you miss two menstrual periods in a row. If you have recently had a baby, wait at least 4 weeks before taking Elvina. You should not take Elvina if you have: untreated or uncontrolled&nbsp; high blood pressure ; heart disease &nbsp;(coronary artery disease, uncontrolled heart valve disorder, history of heart attack, stroke, or blood clot); a blood-clotting disorder or circulation problems; problems with your eyes, kidneys or circulation caused by&nbsp; diabetes ; a history of hormone-related cancer such as breast or uterine cancer; unusual vaginal bleeding that has not been checked by a doctor; liver disease,&nbsp; liver cancer , history of&nbsp; jaundice &nbsp;caused by pregnancy or birth control pills; or severe&nbsp; migraine &nbsp;headaches (with aura, numbness, weakness, or vision changes), especially if you are older than 35. To make sure Elvina are safe for you, tell your doctor if you have: high blood pressure , varicose veins; high cholesterol or triglycerides, or if you are&nbsp; overweight ; an electrolyte imbalance (such as high levels of potassium in your blood); a history of&nbsp; depression ; diabetes , underactive thyroid, gallbladder disease; seizures or&nbsp; epilepsy ; tuberculosis ; or a history of fibrocystic breast disease, lumps, nodules, or an abnormal mammogram. The hormones in Elvina can pass into breast milk and may harm a nursing baby. Elvina may also slow breast milk production. Do not use if you are breast feeding. How should I take Elvina? Take Elvina exactly as prescribed by your doctor. Follow all directions on your prescription label. Do not take this medicine in larger or smaller amounts or for longer than recommended. You will take your first pill on the first day of your period or on the first Sunday after your period begins. You may need to use back-up birth control, such as condoms or a spermicide, when you first start using Elvina. Follow your doctor's instructions. The correct way to take the pill is to take one pill every day at the same time in the order directed on the package. Preferably, take the pill after the evening meal or at bedtime, with some liquid, as needed. Elvina can be taken without regard to meals. When the pills run out, start a new pack the following day. You may get pregnant if you do not take one pill daily. Get your prescription refilled before you run out of pills completely. Elvina packs contain 21 yellow pills (with hormones) and seven white "reminder" pills. The reminder pills give you a break from the hormone pills and keep you on your regular cycle. Your period will usually begin while you are using the white reminder pills. You may have breakthrough bleeding, especially during the first 3 months. Tell your doctor if this bleeding continues or is very heavy. Use a back-up birth control if you are sick with severe vomiting or&nbsp; diarrhoea . If you need surgery or medical tests or if you will be on bed rest, you may need to stop using Yasmin for a short time. Any doctor or surgeon who treats you should know that you are using birth control pills. While taking birth control pills, you will need to visit your doctor regularly. Store Elvina at room temperature away from moisture and heat. What happens if I miss a dose? Follow the patient instructions provided with your medicine. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you do not understand these instructions. Missing a pill increases your risk of becoming pregnant. If you miss one active pill, take two pills on the day that you remember. Then take one pill per day for the rest of the pack. If you miss two active pills in a row in Week 1 or 2, take two pills per day for two days in a row. Then take one pill per day for the rest of the pack. Use back-up birth control for at least 7 days following the missed pills. If you miss two active pills in a row in Week 3, throw out the rest of the pack and start a new pack the same day if you are a Day 1 starter. If you are a Sunday starter, keep taking a pill every day until Sunday. On Sunday, throw out the rest of the pack and start a new pack that day. If you miss three active pills in a row in Week 1, 2, or 3, throw out the rest of the pack and start a new pack on the same day if you are a Day 1 starter. If you are a Sunday starter, keep taking a pill every day until Sunday. On Sunday, throw out the rest of the pack and start a new pack that day. If you miss two or more pills, you may not have a period during the month. If you miss a period for two months in a row, call your doctor because you might be pregnant. If you miss a reminder pill, throw it away and keep taking one reminder pill per day until the pack is empty. You do not need back-up birth control if you miss a reminder pill. What should I avoid while taking Elvina? Do not smoke while taking Elvina, especially if you are older than 35 years of age. Elvina will not protect you from sexually transmitted diseases - including&nbsp; HIV and AIDS . Using a condom is the only way to protect yourself from these diseases. Elvina side effects Get emergency medical help if you have signs of an allergic reaction to Elvina: hives; difficult breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Stop using Elvina and call your doctor at once if you have: signs of a&nbsp; stroke &nbsp;- sudden numbness or weakness (especially on one side of the body), sudden severe headache, slurred speech, problems with vision or balance; signs of a blood clot -&nbsp; chest pain , sudden cough, wheezing, coughing up blood, swelling or warmth in one or both legs; heart attack symptoms - chest pain or pressure, pain spreading to your jaw or shoulder, nausea, sweating; liver problems - severe stomach pain, fever, tired feeling, loss of appetite, dark urine, clay-colored stools,&nbsp; jaundice &nbsp;(yellowing of the skin or eyes); a change in the pattern or severity of migraine headaches; swelling in your hands, ankles, or feet; a breast lump; or symptoms of&nbsp; depression &nbsp;- sleep problems, weakness, tired feeling, mood changes. Common Elvina side effects may include: nausea, vomiting; breast tenderness; headache , mood changes, feeling tired or irritable; weight gain ; or changes in your menstrual periods, decreased sex drive. What other drugs will affect Elvina? Many drugs can interact with birth control pills and make them less effective, which may result in pregnancy. Ethinyl estradiol can also affect blood levels of certain other drugs, making them less effective or increasing side effects. This includes prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal products. References: http://www.drugs.com/yasmin.html http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/2135/SPC/Yasmin+0.03+mg+3mg+film-coated+tablets/ http://www.rxlist.com/yasmin-drug.htm http://patient.info/leaflets/yasmin.htm http://patient.info/medicine/combined-hormonal-contraceptives http://www.drugs.com/uk/yasmin-tablets-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin