Actos Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas. Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Actos Tablets You are here: Home Actos Tablets Actos (Pioglitazone) is an anti-diabetic medicine used to treat type 2 (non-insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus. Actos tablets helps control the level of sugar in your blood when you have type 2 diabetes by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Why have I been prescribed Actos? Actos (Pioglitazone) is an anti-diabetic medicine used to treat type 2 (non-insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus. Actos tablets helps control the level of sugar in your blood when you have type 2 diabetes by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Actos tablets may be used on their own or in combination with Glucophage and / or other oral anti-diabetic medicines. Actos tablets may also be used in combination with insulin. How does it work? Actos makes the body more sensitive to insulin thereby increasing uptake and utilisation of glucose. When and how do I take it? You may take your tablets with or after a meal or on an empty stomach. You should swallow the tablets with a glass of water. What’s the dose? Actose may be initiated at 15mg or 30mg once daily. The dose may be increased in increments up to 45mg once daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Actos may interact with medicines which could speed up or slow down the breakdown of the drug in the body like gemfibrozil and rifampicin. Always tell your doctor/pharmacist what you are taking. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? The following side effects have been experienced by some patients taking Actos tablets: localised swelling (oedema) weight gain headache sinusitis respiratory infection dizziness vertigo numbness abnormal vision blurred vision due to swelling (or fluid) in the back of the eye &nbsp; flatulence joint pain impotence sweating fatigue insomnia decreased blood sugar ( hypoglycaemia ) sugar in urine proteins in urine impaired liver function, a small reduction in red blood cell count, back pain, shortness of breath. If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Actos. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Actos should not be taken during pregnancy or during breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiazolidinedione http://www.drugs.com/actos.html http://www.drugwatch.com/actos/ http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM183833.pdf http://www.emedicinehealth.com/drug-pioglitazone_oral/article_em.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes - Type 2 , Diabetes , Diabetes - Hyperglycemia , Diabetes - Hypoglycemia , Diabetes - Type 1 , Diabetes - Type 1in Children , Diabetes - Type 2 in Children , Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you , Diabetic coma Print This Page More Videos... Diabetes Treatment Options Diabetes - What you need to know about Type 1 &amp; Type 2 Health Reference Diabetes - Type 2 Diabetes Diabetes - Hyperglycemia Diabetes - Hypoglycemia Diabetes - Type 1 Diabetes - Type 1in Children Diabetes - Type 2 in Children Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you Diabetic coma Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin