Heartburn | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Heartburn You are here: Home Heartburn Heartburn is a burning sensation in your chest, just behind your breastbone. Heartburn pain is often worse when lying down or bending over. What is it? Heartburn is a burning sensation in your chest, just behind your breastbone. Heartburn pain is often worse when lying down or bending over. Occasional heartburn is common and no cause for alarm. Most people can manage the discomfort of heartburn on their own with lifestyle changes and over-the-counter medications. More frequent heartburn that interferes with your daily routine may be a symptom of something more serious that requires help from a doctor. Symptoms Symptoms of heartburn include: A burning pain in the chest that usually occurs after eating and may occur at night Pain that worsens when lying down or bending over Causes Heartburn occurs when stomach acid backs up into your esophagus. Normally when you swallow, your lower esophageal sphincter — a circular band of muscle around the bottom part of your esophagus — relaxes to allow food and liquid to flow down into your stomach. Then it closes again. However, if the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes abnormally or weakens, stomach acid can flow back up into your esophagus, causing heartburn. The acid backup is worse when you're bent over or lying down. Risk factors Certain foods and drinks can trigger heartburn in some people, including: Alcohol Black pepper Chocolate Coffee Fatty food Fried food Ketchup Mustard Orange juice Peppermint Soft drinks Tomato sauce Vinegar Complications Heartburn that occurs frequently and interferes with your routine is considered gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD ). GORD treatment may require prescription medications and, occasionally, surgery or other procedures. GORD can also cause serious complications. See your doctor if your heartburn becomes more frequent or no longer responds to over-the-counter medications. Your doctor can determine if your heartburn is likely to be a symptom of GORD . References: http://www.emedicinehealth.com/heartburn/article_em.htm http://www.medicinenet.com/heartburn_reflux/article.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heartburn http://www.health.com/health/gallery/0,,20527745,00.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Stress - What you need to know. Protium (Pantoprazole) Tablets Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin