Lynch's Pharmacy, Douglas, Bravelle Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Bravelle injection You are here: Home Bravelle injection Bravelle is used to treat infertility in women. Why have I been prescribed Bravelle? Bravelle is used to treat infertility in women. How does it work? Bravelle is a preparation of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). FSH works by stimulating the ovaries to mature egg follicles. When and how do I take it? BRAVELLE is intended for subcutaneous (SC) injection, injection under the skin, after dissolving the powder in the solvent provided. The powder should be mixed immediately prior to use. In order to avoid the injection of large volumes up to 6 vials of the powder may be dissolved in the solvent provided. The solution should not be used if it contains particles or if it is not clear. What’s the dose? Your doctor will decide how much you should take, depending on your response to the first dose. It will usually be one injection daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Interactions of Bravelle with other medicines have not been investigated; interactions with commonly used medicines can therefore not be excluded. Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Bravelle can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. The most commonly reported adverse events during treatment with BRAVELLE in clinical trials are headache and abdominal pain, both occurring in 10% of patients followed by nausea, vaginal haemorrhage, and abdominal distension, each occurring in 5 to 9% of patients. Allergic, local or generalized skin reactions and delayed-type hypersensitivity have been reported with the use of gonadotropin preparations. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Bravelle. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Bravelle must not be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urofollitropin https://www.ferringfertility.com/endometrin/ https://www.ferring.com/en/products/reproductive-health/ http://www.marylandcrm.com/drugs.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin