Depression | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Depression You are here: Home Depression Often thought of as just a symptom, depression is itself a medical condition and can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems. What is it? Depression&nbsp;is more than just a bout of the blues, it isn't a weakness, nor is it something that you can simply "snap out" of.&nbsp;Depression is a chronic illness that usually requires long-term treatment, like diabetes or High Blood Pressure, however most people with Depression&nbsp;feel better with medication, psychological counseling or other treatment. How do I recognise it? Depression&nbsp;symptoms include: Feelings of sadness or unhappiness Irritability or frustration, even over small matters Loss of interest or pleasure in normal activities Reduced sex drive Insomnia or excessive sleeping Changes in appetite — depression often causes decreased appetite and weight loss, but in some people it causes increased cravings for food and weight gain Agitation or restlessness — for example, pacing, hand-wringing or an inability to sit still Slowed thinking, speaking or body movements Indecisiveness, distractibility and decreased concentration Fatigue , tiredness and loss of energy — even small tasks may seem to require a lot of effort Feelings of worthlessness or guilt, fixating on past failures or blaming yourself when things aren't going right. Trouble thinking, concentrating, making decisions and remembering things Frequent thoughts of death, dying or suicide Crying spells for no apparent reason Unexplained physical problems, such as back pain or headaches Causes It's not known exactly what causes Depression. As with many mental illnesses, it appears a variety of factors may be involved. These include: Biological differences. Neurotransmitters. Hormones. Inherited traits. Life events. Early childhood trauma. How do you treat it? Like any disease, even if there is no cure, there is almost always something you can do to manage it and take control. There are three main areas involved in the treatment of any disease: Conventional medicines Complementary medicines Complementary therapies For information on medicines and therapies relevant to Depression, make an appointment at Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale , Douglas, Cork on 021-4366923. Learn all about the drugs used to treat the disease and any complementary medicines or therapies proven to help. Equip yourself with the tools to manage the condition and not be managed by it. How do you live with it? Certain adjustments may be needed to get on with your life, and often, some simple tips and advice can go a long way to making these changes.&nbsp; When you come to a Lynchs Pharmacy Clinic, we give you all necessary information available to make your life more manageable and allow you to live better with your condition. References http://www.cks.nhs.uk/patient_information_leaflet/depression Depression-http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depression Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... What is Bipolar Disorder? Camcolit (lithium carbonate) Tablets Gamanil (Gamanil) Tablets Seroxat (Paroxetine) Tablets Lexapro (Escitalopram) Tablets Faverin (Fluvoxamine) Tablets Anxicalm (Diazepam) Cymbalta (Duloxetine) Tablets Cipramil (Citalopram) Amitriptyline Tablets Lustral Tablets (Sertraline) Abilify - (Aripiprazole) Prozac (Fluoxetine) Alprazolam Tablets Xanax (Alprazolam) tablets Efexor XL (Venlafaxine) Medicine Reference Affex Amitriptyline Anafranil Biozac - (Fluoxetine) Ciprager Tablets - Citalopram Cipramil Tablets - Citalopram Cymbalta Capsules Depreger - Sertraline Dothep Edronax Efexor Capsules - Venlafaxine Efexor XL Capsules Faverin Tablets Fluanxol (Flupentixol) Gamanil 70mg Tablets Gerozac - (Fluoxetine) Imipramine Ireven Capsules - (Venlafaxine) Lexapro Tablets Lustral Tablets Manerix Mianserin Mirap - (Mirtazapine) Molipaxin Capsules Nardil Tablets Omega 3 Fish Oils Optimax Capsules Paroser - (Paroxetine) Sage Seroxat Tablets - (Paroxetine) St. John&#039;s Wort Capsules Surmontil Capsules Valdoxan Tablets Venex XL Capsules - (Venlafaxine) Venlofex Capsules - (Venlafaxine) Zismirt Tablets - (Mirtazapine) Zispin Tablets - (Mirtazapine) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin