Kidney infection | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Kidney infection You are here: Home Kidney infection Kidney infection (pyelonephritis) is a specific type of urinary tract infection (UTI) that generally begins in your urethra or bladder and travels up into your kidneys. What is it? Kidney infection (pyelonephritis) is a specific type of urinary tract infection (UTI) that generally begins in your urethra or bladder and travels up into your kidneys. A kidney infection requires prompt medical attention. If not treated properly, a kidney infection can permanently damage your kidneys or spread to your bloodstream and cause a life-threatening infection. Kidney infection treatment usually includes antibiotics and often requires hospitalization. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of a kidney infection may include: Fever Back, side (flank) or groin pain Abdominal pain Frequent urination Strong, persistent urge to urinate Burning sensation or pain when urinating Pus or blood in your urine (haematuria) Causes Kidney infection typically occurs when bacteria enter your urinary tract through the urethra and begin to multiply. Bacteria from an infection elsewhere in your body also can spread through your bloodstream to your kidneys. Kidney infection is unusual through this route, but it can occur in some circumstances — for instance, when a foreign body, such as an artificial joint or heart valve, gets infected. Rarely, kidney infection results after kidney surgery. Risk factors Factors that increase your risk of a kidney infection include: Female anatomy . Women have a greater risk of kidney infection than do men. A woman's urethra is much shorter than a man's, so bacteria have less distance to travel from outside the body to the bladder. The proximity of the urethra to the vagina and anus also creates more opportunities for bacteria to enter the bladder. Once in the bladder, an infection can spread to the kidneys. Obstruction in the urinary tract . Anything that impedes the flow of urine or reduces your ability to completely empty your bladder when urinating, such as a kidney stone, structural abnormalities in your urinary system or, in men, an enlarged prostate gland, can increase your risk of kidney infection. Weakened immune system . Medical conditions that impair your immune system, such as cancer , diabetes or the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ), increase your risk of kidney infection. Certain medications, such as drugs taken to prevent rejection of transplanted organs, have a similar effect. Damage to nerves around the bladder . Nerve or spinal cord damage may block the sensations of a bladder infection so that you're unaware when it's advancing to a kidney infection. Prolonged use of a urinary catheter . Urinary catheters are tubes used to drain urine from the bladder. You may have a catheter placed in your bladder during and after some surgical procedures and diagnostic tests. A catheter may be used continuously if you're confined to a bed. A condition that causes urine to flow the wrong way . In vesicoureteral reflux, small amounts of urine flow from your bladder back up into your ureters and kidneys. People with vesicoureteral reflux may have frequent kidney infections during childhood and are at higher risk of kidney infection during both childhood and adulthood. Complications If left untreated, a kidney infection can lead to potentially serious complications, such as: Permanent kidney damage . A kidney infection can lead to permanent kidney damage that causes chronic kidney failure. Blood poisoning (septicemia) . Your kidneys filter waste from your blood and then return your blood to the rest of your body. If you have a kidney infection, the bacteria can spread as the kidneys return blood to circulation. Pregnancy complications . Women who develop a kidney infection during pregnancy may have an increased risk of delivering low birth weight babies. Diagnosis Your doctor may suspect you have a kidney infection based on your signs and symptoms, such as fever and upper back pain . If your doctor suspects you have kidney infection, he or she will likely ask for a urine sample to determine whether bacteria, blood or pus is in your urine. References http://www.medicinenet.com/kidney_infection/article.htm https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/K/Kidney-infection/Causes-of-kidney-infection.html http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Kidney-infection/Pages/Symptoms.aspx http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/kidney-disease/pyelonephritis-kidney-infection/Pages/index.aspx Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Cefodox (Cefpodoxime) Tablets Tetralysal (Lymecycline) Capsules Suprax (Cefixime) Tablets Normix (Rifaximin) Tablets Monotrim (Trimethoprim) Tablets/Liquid Minocin (Minocycline) Capsules/Tablets Medicine Reference Trimethoprim Tablets/Suspension Ciprofloxacin Tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin