Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, COVID 19 Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Corona Virus (COVID 19) You are here: Home Corona Virus (COVID 19) Coronaviruses (CoV) are a large family of viruses that cause illness ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV). A novel coronavirus (nCoV) is a new strain that has not been previously identified in humans. What is it? Coronaviruses are a family of viruses that can cause illnesses such as the common cold, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). In 2019, a new coronavirus was identified as the cause of a disease outbreak in China. The virus is now known as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The disease it causes is called coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Cases of COVID-19 have been reported in a growing number of countries, including the U.S. Public health groups, such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), are monitoring the situation and posting updates on their websites. These groups have also issued recommendations for preventing and treating the illness. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 may appear two to 14 days after exposure and can include: Fever Cough Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing The severity of COVID-19 symptoms can range from very mild to severe. People who are older or have existing medical conditions, such as heart disease, may be at higher risk of serious illness. This is similar to what is seen with other respiratory illnesses, such as influenza. When to see a doctor Contact your doctor right away if you have COVID-19 symptoms and you've possibly been exposed to the virus. Tell your doctor if you've recently traveled internationally. Call your doctor ahead to tell him or her about your symptoms and recent travels and possible exposure before you go to your appointment. Causes It's unclear exactly how contagious the new coronavirus is. It appears to be spreading from person to person among those in close contact. It may be spread by respiratory droplets released when someone with the virus coughs or sneezes. Risk factors Risk factors for COVID-19 appear to include: Recent travel from or residence in an area with ongoing spread of COVID-19 as determined by CDC or WHO Close contact with someone who has COVID-19 — such as when a family member or health care worker takes care of an infected person Prevention Although there is no vaccine available to prevent infection with the new coronavirus, you can take steps to reduce your risk of infection. WHO and CDC recommend following the standard precautions for avoiding respiratory viruses: Wash your hands often with soap and water, or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Cover your mouth and nose with your elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze. Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth if your hands aren't clean. Avoid close contact with anyone who is sick. Avoid sharing dishes, glasses, bedding and other household items if you're sick. Clean and disinfect surfaces you often touch. Stay home from work, school and public areas if you're sick. CDC doesn't recommend that healthy people wear a facemask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19. Only wear a mask if a health care provider tells you to do so. WHO also recommends that you: Avoid eating raw or undercooked meat or animal organs. Avoid contact with live animals and surfaces they may have touched if you're visiting live markets in areas that have recently had new coronavirus cases. Travel If you're planning to travel internationally, first check the CDC and WHO websites for updates and advice. Also look for any health advisories that may be in place where you plan to travel. You may also want to talk with your doctor if you have health conditions that make you more susceptible to respiratory infections and complications. Diagnosis If you develop symptoms of COVID-19, contact your doctor. Tell him or her about any recent travels, especially international travel. Also let your doctor know if you've had close contact with anyone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19. Your doctor may take samples, including a sample of saliva (sputum), a nasal swab and a throat swab, to send for testing. Treatment Currently, no antiviral medication is recommended to treat COVID-19. Treatment is directed at relieving symptoms and may include: Pain relievers Cough syrup or medication Rest Fluid intake If your doctor thinks you can be treated at home, he or she may give you special instructions, such as to isolate yourself as much as possible from family while you're sick and to stay home for a period of time. If you're very ill, you may need to be treated in the hospital. Seeing a Doctor When you make the appointment, ask if there's anything you need to do in advance. Make a list of: Your symptoms, including any that seem unrelated to the reason for your appointment Your recent travels, including any international travels Key personal information, including major stresses, recent life changes and family medical history All medications, vitamins or other supplements you take, including the doses References: https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/coronavirus/coronavirus.html https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronavirus/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20479976 &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Anadin Paracetamol (OTC) Panadol (OTC) Paracetamol Paracetamol Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin