Deltacortril, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Deltacortril 2.5mg &amp; 5mg Tablets You are here: Home Deltacortril 2.5mg &amp; 5mg Tablets Corticosteroids (cortisone-like medicines) are used to provide relief for inflamed areas of the body. They lessen swelling, redness, itching, and allergic reactions. They are often used as part of the treatment for a number of different diseases, such as severe allergies, skin problems, asthma etc. Why have I been prescribed Deltacortril? Deltacortril (Prednisolone) is used in a wide range of inflammatory and auto-immune conditions including: allergies , including severe allergic reactions inflammation affecting the: &nbsp;-lungs, including asthma &nbsp;-blood vessels and heart &nbsp;-bowel or kidneys &nbsp;-muscles and joints, including rheumatoid arthritis &nbsp;-eye or nervous system skin conditions some infections some cancers, including l eukaemia , lymphoma and myeloma to prevent organ rejection after a transplant. Also: to boost steroid levels when the body is not making enough natural steroid on its own. to treat high calcium levels. How does it work? Deltacortril belongs to a group of medicines called steroids. Their full name is corticosteroids. These corticosteroids occur naturally in the body, and help to maintain health and well-being. Boosting your body with extra corticosteroid (such as Deltacortril) is an effective way to treat various illnesses involving inflammation in the body. Deltacortril reduces this inflammation, which could otherwise go on making your condition worse. When and how do I take it? Deltacortril should be swallowed with water, usually in the morning. You can take Deltacortril before or after a meal. What’s the dose? Different illnesses require different doses of Deltacortril. Depending on your illness your daily dose may be between 5 and 60 mg. In some cases you may be instructed to take it every other day. Your doctor will decide when and how to treat you with Deltacortril. Once your condition starts to get better, your doctor may change your dosage to a lower one. Your doctor may also reduce your dosage before stopping treatment completely. This may depend on your illness, your dosage and how long you have been taking this medicine. In all cases you should be careful to follow any changes. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or pharmacist. You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Deltacortril: acetazolamide aminoglutethimide amphotericin aspirin bambuterol carbamazepine carbenoxolone ciclosporin erythromycin fenoterol formoterol indometacin insulin ketoconazole methotrexate mifepristone phenobarbital phenytoin primidone rifabutin rifampicin ritodrine ritonavir salbutamol salmeterol somatropin terbutaline theophylline troleandomycin The following types of medicine may interact with Deltacortril: anticoagulants antihypertensives cardiac glycosides diuretics hypoglycaemics liver enzyme inducers liver enzyme inhibitors oestrogens rifamycins salicylates ulcerogenic drugs vaccines If you are taking Deltacortril and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Everyone's reaction to a medicine is different. It is difficult to predict which side-effects you will have from taking a particular medicine, or whether you will have any side-effects at all. The important thing is to tell your prescriber or pharmacist if you are having problems with your medicine. The frequency of these side-effects is unknown: thromboembolism thrombophlebitis hiding symptoms of infection eye or eyesight problems reduced growth osteoporosis thinning of the skin metabolic problems diabetes raised blood pressure blood or bleeding problems hypersensitivity reactions such as anaphylaxis general feeling of being unwell tiredness heart problems indigestion nausea stomach problems weight gain appetite gain pancreatitis muscle problems bone problems bone fractures water retention tendon rupture muscle pain or tenderness healing problems skin problems bruising striae telangiectasia acne sweating may affect the results for certain tests itching urticaria skin rash or rashes irregular menstrual periods amenorrhoea raised intracranial pressure in children worsening of schizophrenia worsening of epilepsy Deltacortril dependence reactivation of tuberculosis euphoria sleeping problems feeling dizzy headaches vertigo personality changes adrenal problems diarrhoea mood swings gastrointestinal problems such as peptic or oesophageal ulcers increased risk of getting infections which may become severe - some of these such as chickenpox may be fatal abnormal laboratory test results increased blood sugar levels worsening of eye infections worsening or reactivation of infections cushingoid facies decreased carbohydrate tolerance - this may lead to an increased requirement for anti-diabetic therapy feeling anxious behavioural changes memory problems confusion psychotic-like behaviour such as mania, delusions, hallucinations and worsening of schizophrenia psychiatric problems - seek immediate medical advice if symptoms such as feeling irritable, euphoria, depressed and labile mood or thoughts of committing suicide occur withdrawal symptoms can occur when this medicine is stopped. These include loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, headache, shedding of the skin, fever , muscle pain, joint pain, rhinitis, conjunctivitis , weight loss or painful, itchy skin . If the dose of Deltacortril is reduced too rapidly serious problems can occur including adrenal problems, lowered blood pressure or death rhabdomyolysis urinary problems hair overgrowth Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Deltacortril Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You should only take this medicine during pregnancy or while breast feeding if your doctor thinks that you need it. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. &nbsp; References: 1. Medicines.ie website- deltacortril SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/3639/SPC/Deltacortril+Tablets/ 2. Medicines.ie- deltacortril PIL http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/8293/PIL/Deltacortril+Tablets/&nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Rheumatoid Arthritis , Asthma , Allergy - (Allergic reactions) Print This Page Health Reference Rheumatoid Arthritis Asthma Allergy - (Allergic reactions) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin