Cradle Cap | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cradle Cap You are here: Home Cradle Cap Infantile seborrheic dermatitis, commonly called cradle cap, causes scaly patches on a baby&#039;s scalp. Though cradle cap isn&#039;t serious, it can cause thick crusting and white or yellow scales. What is it? Infantile seborrheic dermatitis, commonly called cradle cap, causes scaly patches on a baby's scalp. Though cradle cap isn't serious, it can cause thick crusting and white or yellow scales. Cradle cap usually resolves on its own within a few months. Self-care measures, such as washing your baby's scalp daily with a mild shampoo, can help loosen and remove the scales. If cradle cap persists or seems severe, your doctor may suggest a medicated shampoo, lotion or other treatment. Symptoms Common signs of cradle cap include: Patchy scaling or thick crusts on the scalp Greasy skin covered with flaky white or yellow scales Skin flakes or dandruff Possibly mild redness Similar scales may also be present on the ears, eyelids, nose and groin. Cradle cap is most common in newborns. It isn't contagious and probably won't bother your baby. In most cases, the condition isn't itchy for infants. Causes Though the exact cause of cradle cap isn't known, one contributing factor may be hormones that pass from the mother to the baby before birth. These hormones cause an abnormal production of oil (sebum) in the oil glands and hair follicles. Another factor may be a yeast (fungus) called malassezia that grows in the sebum along with bacteria. Antifungal treatments, such as ketoconazole, are often effective, supporting the idea that yeast is a contributing factor. When to seek medical advice See your baby's doctor if: You've tried self-care steps without success. The patches spread to your baby's face or body. Treatments and drugs Cradle cap usually doesn't require medical treatment. It clears up on its own within a few months. In the meantime, wash your baby's hair once a day with mild baby shampoo and brush the scalp lightly with a soft brush to loosen the scales. If frequent shampooing doesn't help, consult your baby's doctor. He or she may recommend a stronger shampoo — such as an adult dandruff shampoo containing tar, 2 percent ketoconazole or 1 percent selenium — to help dissolve the scales. Hydrocortisone cream applied daily or every other day is sometimes helpful to reduce redness and inflammation. For older babies, scalp ringworm infections may resemble cradle cap. This condition may require a prescription antifungal shampoo. Another condition resembling cradle cap is infantile eczema. Lifestyle remedies The following over-the-counter treatments and self-care tips can help you control and manage cradle cap. Gently rub your baby's scalp with your fingers or washcloth to loosen the scales. Wash your baby's hair once a day with mild baby shampoo. Loosen the scales with a small, soft-bristled brush before rinsing off the shampoo. If the scales don't loosen easily, rub petroleum jelly or a few drops of mineral oil onto your baby's scalp. Let it soak into the scales for a few minutes, and then brush and shampoo your baby's hair as usual. If you leave the oil in your baby's hair, the scales may accumulate and worsen the cradle cap. Once the scales are gone, wash your baby's hair every few days with a mild shampoo to prevent scale buildup. Prevention Shampooing your baby's hair every few days can help prevent cradle cap. Stick with a mild baby shampoo unless your baby's doctor recommends something stronger. References: http://www.eumom.ie/baby/10-products-to-treat-cradle-cap-as-recommended-by-you/ http://www.babycenter.com/0_cradle-cap-infantile-seborrheic-dermatitis_80.bc http://www.babycentre.co.uk/a80/cradle-cap https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/C/Cradle-cap/Treating-cradle-cap.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cradle_cap &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Hydrocortisyl Cream Nizoral Shampoo Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin