Infant acid reflux | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Infant acid reflux You are here: Home Infant acid reflux Does your baby seem to spit up a lot? Grab your burp cloth and join the group! Infant acid reflux, more accurately known as gastroesophageal reflux, is a common problem. What is it? Does your baby seem to spit up a lot? Grab your burp cloth and join the group! Infant acid reflux, more accurately known as gastroesophageal reflux, is a common problem. In fact, more than half of all babies experience infant acid reflux during the first three months after birth, according to the National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. Although infant acid reflux is most likely after a feeding, it can happen anytime your baby coughs, cries or strains. And it's probably tougher on you than on your baby. Even when soaked in spit up, most babies who have infant acid reflux are healthy and content. Infant acid reflux typically resolves on its own by ages 12 to 18 months. In the meantime, changes in feeding technique — such as smaller, more frequent feedings, changing position or interrupting feedings to burp — can help keep reflux under control. In a few cases, medication or other treatments may be recommended. Symptoms Signs of infant acid reflux may include: Spitting up Irritability during or after feedings Poor feedings Causes Normally, the ring of muscle between the esophagus and the stomach (lower esophageal sphincter) relaxes and opens only when you swallow. Otherwise, it's tightly closed — keeping stomach contents where they belong. Until this muscle matures, stomach contents may occasionally flow up the esophagus and out of your baby's mouth. Sometimes air bubbles in the esophagus may push liquid out of your baby's mouth. In other cases, your baby may simply drink too much, too fast. Complications Most cases of infant acid reflux clear up on their own without causing problems for the baby. Rarely, infant acid reflux can lead to poor growth or breathing problems. Some research indicates that babies who have frequent episodes of infant acid reflux may be more likely to develop gastroesophageal reflux disease during later childhood. Diagnosis Diagnosis of infant acid reflux is typically based on your baby's symptoms and a physical exam. If your baby is healthy, content and growing well, tests and treatment aren't usually needed. If your baby's doctor suspects a more serious condition, such as GORD, diagnostic tests may include: Lab tests . Your baby's doctor may do various blood and urine tests to identify or rule out possible causes of recurring vomiting and poor weight gain. Esophageal pH monitoring . To determine if irritability, sleep disturbances or other symptoms are associated with reflux, it may be helpful to measure the acidity in your baby's esophagus. The doctor will insert a thin tube through your baby's nose or mouth into the esophagus. The tube is attached to a device that monitors acidity. Your baby may need to remain in the hospital for the monitoring, which often lasts 24 hours. Upper GI series . If the doctor suspects a gastrointestinal obstruction, he or she may recommend a series of X-rays known as an upper gastrointestinal (GI) series. Before the X-rays, your baby may drink a white, chalky liquid (barium). The barium coats the stomach, which helps any abnormalities show up more clearly on the X-rays. Upper endoscopy . Your baby's doctor may use this procedure to identify or rule out problems in the esophagus, such as narrowing (stricture) or inflammation (esophagitis). The doctor will insert a special tube equipped with a camera lens and light through your baby's mouth into the esophagus, stomach and first part of the small intestine. Samples of any suspicious areas may be taken for analysis. For infants and children, endoscopy is usually done under general anesthesia. References: http://www.medicinenet.com/gerd_in_infants_and_children/article.htm http://www.healthline.com/health/gerd/infants-treatment http://www.babycentre.co.uk/a567208/reflux-and-silent-reflux http://www.parenting.com/article/ask-dr-sears-coping-with-babys-acid-reflux http://www.parents.com/baby/care/gas/best-remedies-for-gas-reflux/ http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/reflux-babies/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/930029-treatment &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin