Menstrual cramps | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Menstrual cramps You are here: Home Menstrual cramps If you&#039;re a woman, chances are you&#039;ve dealt with menstrual cramps — even if you&#039;ve never heard of &quot;dysmenorrhea,&quot; the medical term for them. What is it? If you're a woman, chances are you've dealt with menstrual cramps — even if you've never heard of "dysmenorrhea," the medical term for them. Menstrual cramps are dull, throbbing or cramping pains in the lower abdomen. Many women experience menstrual cramps just before and during their menstrual periods. For some women, the discomfort is merely annoying. For others, it can be severe enough to interfere with everyday activities for a few days every month. For some women, menstrual cramps are caused by identifiable problems, such as endometriosis or uterine fibroids. Treating the underlying cause is key to reducing the pain. Menstrual cramps that aren't caused by some underlying condition tend to lessen with age and often disappear once a woman has given birth. Symptoms Symptoms of menstrual cramps include: Dull, throbbing or cramping pain in your lower abdomen Pain that radiates to your lower back and thighs Some woman also experience: Nausea and vomiting Loose stools Sweating Dizziness Causes During menstrual periods, your uterus contracts to help expel its lining. Prostaglandins, hormone-like substances involved in pain and inflammation, trigger the uterine muscle contractions. Higher levels of prostaglandins are associated with more severe menstrual cramps. Many experts believe that severe contractions constrict the blood vessels feeding the uterus. The resulting pain can be compared to the angina that occurs when blocked coronary arteries starve portions of the heart of food and oxygen. Menstrual cramps may also be caused by: Endometriosis . In this painful condition, the type of tissue that lines your uterus becomes implanted outside your uterus, most commonly on your fallopian tubes, ovaries or the tissue lining your pelvis. Uterine fibroids . These noncancerous tumours and growths in the wall of the uterus rarely may be the cause of pain. Adenomyosis . In this condition, the tissue that lines your uterus begins to grow into the muscular walls of the uterus. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) . This infection of the female reproductive organs is usually caused by sexually transmitted bacteria. Cervical stenosis . In some women, the opening of the cervix may be so small that it impedes menstrual flow, causing a painful increase of pressure within the uterus. Risk factors Risk factors associated with dysmenorrhea include: Age younger than 20 Early onset of puberty (age 11 or younger) Heavy bleeding during periods (menorrhagia) Never having delivered a baby Complications Complications may vary, depending on the underlying cause of your menstrual cramps. For example, endometriosis can cause fertility problems, while pelvic inflammatory disease can scar your fallopian tubes, increasing the risk of a fertilised egg implanting in the tube (ectopic pregnancy) instead of in your uterus. Diagnosis If your doctor suspects that your menstrual cramps are being caused by an underlying disorder, he or she may order one or more of the following tests. Ultrasound This painless test uses sound waves to visualize internal organs. It is often used to check for abnormalities in the uterus, cervix and fallopian tubes. A wand, lubricated with jelly, is pressed against your lower abdomen and the resulting image shows up on a video screen. In some cases, the wand may be inserted into your vagina, to check your ovaries and the lining of your uterus. Computerized tomography (CT) A CT scan combines X-ray images taken from many angles to produce cross-sectional images of bones, organs and other soft tissues inside your body. This painless procedure can provide more detail than can regular X-rays. A technician positions you on a narrow table that slides into the machine. You must lie still during the test, or the images will be blurry. CT scans usually take about 30 minutes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) MRIs use radio waves and a powerful magnetic field to produce detailed images of internal structures. This painless procedure may be used to check for tumours or signs of endometriosis. You lie on a narrow table that slides into a tunnel inside the MRI machine. You must lie very still during the scans to avoid blurring the images. MRIs often take at least an hour to complete, but they are divided into individual scans that usually last only a few minutes. The machine is very noisy during the scans, so you may need earplugs to block the banging sounds. If you are claustrophobic, you should talk to your doctor about taking medicine to help you relax during the test. Hysteroscopy In this procedure, your doctor inserts a thin, lighted tube through your vagina and cervix into your uterus. The hysteroscope works like a tiny telescope, allowing your doctor to look through it to check for such things as fibroids or polyps. Afterward, you may experience some cramping and spotting. LaparoscopyIn this outpatient surgical procedure, your doctor views your abdominal cavity by making tiny incisions in your abdomen and inserting a fiber-optic tube with a small camera lens. Laparoscopy can check for: Endometriosis Adhesions Fibroids Ovarian cysts Ectopic pregnancy References http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Periods-painful/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/253812-overview http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic_Dysmenorrhea https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/gynecology-and-obstetrics/menstrual-abnormalities/dysmenorrhea http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/menstrual-cramps/basics/definition/con-20025447 Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin