Brolene, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Brolene You are here: Home Brolene Brolene eye drops and eye ointment contain propamidine, an antibacterial. It is used to treat eye infections. What are Brolene eye drops used for? Minor bacterial infections of the eye or eyelid, eg conjunctivitis, blepharitis. Rare eye infection associated with contact lens use, called acanthamoeba keratitis (only when prescribed by an eye specialist). How do Brolene eye drops work? Brolene eye drops and eye ointment contain the active ingredient propamidine, which is a type of medicine called an antibacterial. It is used to treat eye infections. Propamidine works by stopping bacteria from growing and multiplying, which controls the numbers of bacteria causing an infection. The remaining bacteria die or are killed by the body's immune system. This treats the infection. Putting the medicine directly into the eye allows the medicine to act directly on the bacteria that are causing the infection. Propamidine can be bought from pharmacies to treat minor eye infections of the eye, eg conjunctivitis, or the eyelids, eg blepharitis. It may also be prescribed by eye specialists in the treatment of a rare eye infection associated with contact lens use, called acanthamoeba keratitis. How do you use Brolene eye drops? If you are using the drops, one or two drops should be administered into the infected eye up to four times a day. If you are using the ointment, a strip of ointment approximately 1cm in length should be applied to the inside of the eyelid once or twice a day. Consult your doctor if there has been no significant improvement in your symptoms after two days use. What should I know before using Brolene eye drops? This medicine is for use in the eye only and must not be taken by mouth. When using the eye drops or ointment you should take care to not touch the dropper or tube tip to any surface, or to your eye, in order to avoid contaminating the medicine. The eye drops and ointment may cause your vision to blur temporarily after you have applied them into your eye. Do not drive or operate machinery until this has worn off. You should not wear contact lenses while you are using Brolene. Wearing contact lenses when you have an eye infection can aggravate the condition. You should not wear your contact lenses for 24 hours after you have finished using this medicine. Do not use for longer than two days without consulting your doctor. Seek medical advice immediately if you have any problems with your vision or your symptoms get worse at any point during treatment. Brolene eye drops and ointment are sterile until opened. Any remaining medicine should be carefully disposed of four weeks after the first opening, as it is likely to be contaminated. You may find it helpful to write the date of first opening on the packet. Who should not use Brolene eye drops? This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to&nbsp; any of its ingredients. Please inform your pharmacist if you have previously experienced an allergy to eye drops. Can I take Brolene eye drops while pregnant or&nbsp; breastfeeding? Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. There is no information available about the safety of&nbsp; Brolene eye drops during pregnancy. It should only be used during pregnancy if considered essential by your doctor. Seek medical advice from your doctor. There is no information available regarding the safety of&nbsp; Brolene eye drops during breastfeeding. It should only be used during breastfeeding if considered essential by your doctor. Seek medical advice from your doctor. What are the possible side effects of Brolene eye drops? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Can I use Brolene eye drops with other medicines? If you are using any other eye drops or ointments you should tell your pharmacist before using Brolene eye drops. If you are using more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least five minutes apart, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. Use eye gels or ointments last. References: http://www.medsafe.govt.nz/Consumers/cmi/b/brolene.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eyes/a6337/brolene-eye-drops-and-ointment-propamidine/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/11316 https://www.drugs.com/uk/brolene-eye-drops-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Conjunctivitis , Pink eye (conjunctivitis) Print This Page Health Reference Conjunctivitis Pink eye (conjunctivitis) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin