Ocular migraine | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Ocular migraine You are here: Home Ocular migraine The term &quot;ocular migraine&quot; can be confusing. It&#039;s sometimes used to refer to two different conditions, one of which usually isn&#039;t cause for concern, and the other which might have more-serious complications. &nbsp; What is it? Migraine aura involving your vision In some cases, "ocular migraine" describes a migraine aura that involves your vision. Migraine auras include a variety of sensations — often visual, but which also may include other sensations, such as numbness — that precede or accompany a migraine. Aura can sometimes occur without an associated headache. Symptoms A migraine aura that affects your vision is common. Visual symptoms are short-lasting. A migraine aura involving your vision will affect both eyes, and you may see: Flashes of light Zigzagging patterns Blind spots Shimmering spots or stars These symptoms can temporarily interfere with certain activities such as reading or driving, but the condition usually isn't considered serious. Retinal migraine Sometimes, the term "ocular migraine" is used as a synonym for the medical term "retinal migraine." A retinal migraine is a rare condition occurring in a person who has experienced other symptoms of migraine. Retinal migraine involves repeated bouts of short-lasting, diminished vision or blindness. This may precede or accompany a headache. A retinal migraine — unlike a migraine aura affecting vision — will affect only one eye, not both. Most often, loss of vision in one eye isn't related to migraine. It's generally caused by some other more serious condition. So if you experience visual loss in one eye, be sure to see an eye specialist. What causes it? Some experts believe the problem is related to spasms in blood vessels of the retina, the lining at the back of the eye. Others think that changes in the nerve cells of the retina are related to the problem. Treatment&nbsp; Ocular migraines usually go away on their own within 30 minutes, so most people don’t need treatment for them. References http://www.webmd.com/migraines-headaches/guide/ocular-migraine-basics http://www.healthline.com/health/causes-of-ocular-migraines#Causes1 http://www.allaboutvision.com/conditions/ocular-migraine.htm http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/migraine-headache/expert-answers/ocular-migraine/faq-20058113 Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Dixarit (Clonidine) Tablets Medicine Reference Topamax - (topiramate) Amitriptyline Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin