Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Cabaser - (Cabergo... Calcichew D3 Forte... Calcichew tablets Calcium Calpol Sugar Free... Calpol Suspension... Calpol Suspension... Calvapen - (Phenox... Calvepen 250 Suspe... Camcolit Tablets Candesartan Tablet... Canesten 500mg Pes... Canesten Cream Canesten HC cream Capoten Capozide Caprin 300mg Caprin 75mg Tablet Cardicor (Bisoprol... Cardura XL Tablets Cariban 10mg/10mg... Carob Casodex (bicalutam... Cataflam Tablets Catapres Tablets Cefaclor Capsules Cefalexin Tablets/... Cefodox (cefpodoxi... Celance Tablets Celebrex Capsules... CellCept Capsule Celluvisc Centyl K Centyl Tablets Cerazette - (desog... Cetrine - (Cetiriz... Cetriz - (Cetirizi... Champix Tablets Chemotherapy Chloromycetin Drop... Cholestagel Tablet... Choline Cialis - (Tadalafi... Cifloxager - (Cipr... Cifox - (Ciproflox... Cilest Tablets Ciloxan Ear Drops Ciloxan Eye Drops/... Cimzia (certolizum... Ciplox - (Ciproflo... Ciprager Tablets -... Cipramil Tablets -... Ciprofloxacin Tabl... Ciproxin Tablets/S... Circadin Tablets (... Clareeze - (Lorata... Clarithromycin Clarityn - (Lorata... Clavamel Tablets/S... Clexane Injection Clomid Tablets (Cl... Clomipramine Clonactil (Chlorpr... Clonamox - Amoxyci... Clonocid - (Clarit... Clopidogrel Tablet... Clorom Tablets - (... Co-Amoxiclav Table... Co-Diovan Tablets CoAprovel Tablets Cobalin-H Injectio... Cocois Codeine phosphate... Codipar Tablets Colgout 500mcg (Co... Colifoam Rectal Fo... Colofac (Mebeverin... Colpermin Capsules Combigan Eye Drops Combined Oral Cont... Combivent Nebules... Combodart - (dutas... Competact Tablets Complimentary Ther... Comtess Tablets Concerta XL Condyline 0.5% Sol... Copaxone Injection CoQ10 Cordarone-X Tablet... Cosentyx (Secukinu... Cosmofer Injection Coversyl Arginine... Coversyl Arginine... Cozaar Tablets Cozaar-comp Tablet... Creon Capsules Crestor Crinone Gel Cyclogest Pessary Cyklokapron (trane... Cymbalta Capsules Cystrin Tablets Medicine - C Cabaser - (Cabergoline) Cabaser (Cabergoline) is used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease. It is used after your Doctor has tried other treatments that have not worked or for people who are already taking other medicines for this illness to help control other symptoms. Calcichew D3 Forte tablets Calcichew D3 Forte (Calcium Carbonate) may be prescribed by doctors or recommended by pharmacists to treat and prevent calcium deficiency, or when the diet or lifestyle does not provide enough, or when body requirements are increased. Calcichew tablets Calcichew (Calcium Carbonate) may be prescribed by doctors or recommended by pharmacists to treat and prevent calcium deficiency, or when the diet or lifestyle does not provide enough, or when body requirements are increased. Calcium Calcium, the most abundant mineral in the body, is found in some foods, added to others, available as a dietary supplement, and present in some medicines (such as antacids). Calpol Sugar Free (OTC) Calpol contains the active ingredient paracetamol, a painkilling medicine used to relieve mild to moderate pain and fever - read on for advice on its use, warnings and side effectsabc Calpol Suspension (OTC) Calpol contains the active ingredient paracetamol, a painkilling medicine used to relieve mild to moderate pain and fever - read on for advice on its use, warnings and side effects. Calpol Suspension (OTC) Calpol contains the active ingredient paracetamol, a painkilling medicine used to relieve mild to moderate pain and fever - read on for advice on its use, warnings and side effects. Calvapen - (Phenoxymethylpenicillin), penicillin v Phenoxymethylpenicillin, commonly known as penicillin V, is a penicillin antibiotic that is orally active. It exerts a bactericidal action against penicillin-sensitive microorganisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts by inhibiting the biosynthesis of cell-wall peptidoglycan. Calvepen 250 Suspension Phenoxymethylpenicillin, commonly known as penicillin V, is a penicillin antibiotic that is orally active. It exerts a bactericidal action against penicillin-sensitive microorganisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts by inhibiting the biosynthesis of cell-wall peptidoglycan. Camcolit Tablets Camcolit tablets contain the active ingredient lithium carbonate, which is a type of medicine known as a mood stabiliser. Candesartan Tablets Candesartan is used for treating high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. Canesten 500mg Pessary Canesten 500mg Pessary is recommended for the treatment of candidal vaginitis. Canesten Cream Canesten cream is to treat fungal infections like athlete's foot and thrush. Canesten HC cream Canesten HC cream contains two active ingredients, clotrimazole and hydrocortisone. Clotrimazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Hydrocortisone is a corticosteroid medicine that is applied to the skin to relieve the symptoms of inflammation. Capoten Capoten (Captopril) is used to treat high blood pressure and certain heart conditions. Capoten can also help people whose heart no longer pumps blood as well as it once did. This condition is known as heart failure. Capoten may also be used to treat patients who recently suffered a heart attack. Capozide Capozide tablets are used in the treatment of hypertension (high blood pressure). Caprin 300mg Caprin (Caprin) has analgesic (pain killing), antipyretic (reduces temperature) and anti-inflammatory actions. It also has a blood thinning action, which has been shown to be useful following myocardial infarction, and in patients with unstable angina or ischaemic stroke. Caprin 75mg Tablet Caprin (Caprin) has a blood thinning action which has been shown to be useful following heart attack and in patients with unstable angina or ischaemic stroke. Caprin 75 is used wherever prolonged dosage of Caprin is required. Caprin 75 is unsuitable for the short-term relief of pain. Cardicor (Bisoprolol) Cardicor (Bisoprolol) is used in the treatment of stable heart failure i.e when the heart is not pumping enough blood to meet the body’s needs. Cardura XL Tablets Cardura is one of a group of medicines called alpha-blockers. It is used to treat high blood pressure, or the symptoms caused by enlargement of the prostate gland in men. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin