Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Cosentyx Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cosentyx (Secukinumab) You are here: Home Cosentyx (Secukinumab) This medication is used to treat plaque psoriasis and certain types of arthritis (such as arthritis of the spine, psoriatic arthritis). Secukinumab belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking a certain natural protein in your body (interleukin-17A) that may cause inflammation and swelling. How to use Cosentyx Syringe Read the Medication Guide and the Instructions for Use leaflet provided by your pharmacist before you start using secukinumab and each time you get a refill. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. Before treatment with this medication, your doctor will test you for tuberculosis (TB). Your doctor should also monitor you for symptoms of TB during and after treatment with this drug. If needed, treatment for tuberculosis or other infections should be given before receiving this medication. This medication is given by injection under your skin as directed by your doctor. The injection is given in the upper arms, thighs, or abdomen (at least 2 inches from your belly button). The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully. If you are using this medication at home, learn all preparation and usage instructions from your health care professional and the product instructions. Wash your hands before using this medication. Remove the medication from the refrigerator 15 to 30 minutes before you inject it to allow it to reach room temperature. Do not shake the medication. The medication should be clear or slightly yellow. Before using, check this product visually for cloudiness, particles, or discoloration. If you see any of these things, do not use the liquid. Before injecting each dose, clean the injection site with rubbing alcohol. Change the injection site each time to lessen injury under the skin. Do not inject the drug into areas of the skin with scars or stretch marks or into skin that is irritated, sore, bruised, red, hardened, or affected by psoriasis. To lessen bruising, do not rub the injection site after a shot. Learn how to store and discard medical supplies safely. Do not reuse syringes. Use this medication regularly to get the most benefit from it. It may help to mark your calendar with a reminder. Tell your doctor if your condition does not improve or if it worsens. Indications Plaque Psoriasis Cosentyx is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adult patients who are candidates for systemic therapy or phototherapy. Psoriatic Arthritis Cosentyx is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with active psoriatic arthritis. Ankylosing Spondylitis Cosentyx is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with active ankylosing spondylitis. Dosage and administration Plaque Psoriasis The recommended dosage is 300 mg by subcutaneous injection at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 followed by 300 mg every 4 weeks. Each 300 mg dosage is given as 2 subcutaneous injections of 150 mg. For some patients, a dosage of 150 mg may be acceptable. Psoriatic Arthritis For other psoriatic arthritis patients, administer COSENTYX with or without a loading dosage by subcutaneous injection. The recommended dosage: With a loading dosage is 150 mg at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 and every 4 weeks thereafter Without a loading dosage is 150 mg every 4 weeks If a patient continues to have active psoriatic arthritis, consider a dosage of 300 mg. COSENTYX may be administered with or without methotrexate. Ankylosing Spondylitis Administer COSENTYX with or without a loading dosage by subcutaneous injection. The recommended dosage: With a loading dosage is 150 mg at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 and every 4 weeks thereafter Without a loading dosage is 150 mg every 4 weeks. Important Administration Instructions There are three presentations for COSENTYX (i.e., Sensoready pen, prefilled syringe, and lyophilized powder in vial for reconstitution). The COSENTYX “Instructions for Use” for each presentation contains more detailed instructions on the preparation and administration of COSENTYX [see Instructions for Use]. COSENTYX is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of a physician. Patients may self-inject after proper training in subcutaneous injection technique using the Sensoready pen or prefilled syringe and when deemed appropriate. The lyophilized powder for reconstitution is for healthcare provider use only. Administer each injection at a different anatomic location (such as upper arms, thighs, or any quadrant of abdomen) than the previous injection, and not into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, erythematous, indurated, or affected by psoriasis. Administration of COSENTYX in the upper, outer arm may be performed by a caregiver or healthcare provider. Preparation For Use Of COSENTYX Sensoready® Pen And Prefilled Syringe Before injection, remove COSENTYX Sensoready pen or COSENTYX prefilled syringe from the refrigerator and allow COSENTYX to reach room temperature (15 to 30 minutes) without removing the needle cap. The removable cap of the COSENTYX Sensoready pen and the COSENTYX prefilled syringe contains natural rubber latex and should not be handled by latex-sensitive individuals. Inspect COSENTYX visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration. COSENTYX injection is a clear to slightly opalescent, colorless to slightly yellow solution. Do not use if the liquid contains visible particles, is discolored or cloudy. COSENTYX does not contain preservatives; therefore, administer the Sensoready pen or prefilled syringe within 1 hour after removal from the refrigerator. Discard any unused product remaining in the Sensoready pen or prefilled syringe. Reconstitution And Preparation Of COSENTYX Lyophilized Powder COSENTYX lyophilized powder should be prepared and reconstituted with Sterile Water for Injection by a trained healthcare provider using aseptic technique and without interruption. The preparation time from piercing the stopper until end of reconstitution on average takes 20 minutes and should not exceed 90 minutes. Remove the vial of COSENTYX lyophilized powder from the refrigerator and allow to stand for 15 to 30 minutes to reach room temperature. Ensure the Sterile Water for Injection is at room temperature. Slowly inject 1 mL of Sterile Water for Injection into the vial containing COSENTYX lyophilized powder and direct the stream of Sterile Water for Injection onto the lyophilized powder. Tilt the vial at an angle of approximately 45 degrees and gently rotate between the fingertips for approximately 1 minute. Do not shake or invert the vial. Allow the vial to stand for about 10 minutes at room temperature to allow for dissolution. Note that foaming may occur. Tilt the vial at an angle of approximately 45 degrees and gently rotate between the fingertips for approximately 1 minute. Do not shake or invert the vial. Allow the vial to stand undisturbed at room temperature for approximately 5 minutes. The reconstituted COSENTYX solution should be essentially free of visible particles, clear to opalescent, and colorless to slightly yellow. Do not use if the lyophilized powder has not fully dissolved or if the liquid contains visible particles, is cloudy or discolored. Prepare the required number of vials (1 vial for the 150 mg dose or 2 vials for the 300 mg dose). The COSENTYX reconstituted solution contains 150 mg of secukinumab in 1 mL of solution. After reconstitution, use the solution immediately or store in the refrigerator at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) for up to 24 hours. Do not freeze. If stored at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F), allow the reconstituted COSENTYX solution to reach room temperature (15 to 30 minutes) before administration. COSENTYX does not contain preservatives; therefore, administer within 1 hour after removal from 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) storage. How supplied Dosage Forms And Strengths Injection: 150 mg/mL solution in a single-use Sensoready pen Injection: 150 mg/mL solution in a single-use prefilled syringe For Injection: 150 mg, lyophilized powder in a single-use vial for reconstitution&nbsp; Storage And Handling COSENTYX Sensoready pens, prefilled syringes and vials must be refrigerated at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F). Keep the product in the original carton to protect from light until the time of use. Do not freeze. To avoid foaming do not shake. COSENTYX does not contain a preservative; discard any unused portion. Side Effects Diarrhea may occur. If this effect persists or worsens, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly. Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects. This medication may lower your ability to fight infections. This may make you more likely to get a serious infection or make any infection you have worse. Tell your doctor right away if you have any signs of infection (such as fever, chills, persistent sore throat, white patches in the mouth, cough). Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: stomach/abdominal pain, diarrhea with blood/mucus. A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing. This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist. Precautions Before using secukinumab, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients (such as latex found in the needle cover on the prefilled syringe/pen), which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details. Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: current/recent/returning infection (such as tuberculosis, herpes), bowel disease (such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis). Secukinumab can make you more likely to get infections or may worsen any current infections. Therefore, wash your hands well to prevent the spread of infection. Avoid contact with people who have infections that may spread to others (such as chickenpox, measles, flu). Consult your doctor if you have been exposed to an infection or for more details. Do not have immunizations/vaccinations without the consent of your doctor. Avoid contact with people who have recently received live vaccines (such as flu vaccine inhaled through the nose). Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products). During pregnancy, this medication should be used only when clearly needed. Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor. It is unknown if this medication passes into breast milk. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding. Interactions Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval. Missed Dose For the best possible benefit, it is important to receive each scheduled dose of this medication as directed. If you miss a dose, contact your doctor or pharmacist right away to establish a new dosing schedule. Do not double the dose to catch up. Storage Store in the refrigerator. Do not freeze. Keep the product in the original carton to protect from light until the time of use. The medication should be used within 1 hour after taking it out of the refrigerator. Discard any unused portion after use. References: http://www.cosentyx.com/index.jsp?usertrack.filter_applied=true&amp;NovaId=6002860695741617155 https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/3669/smpc https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-167673/cosentyx-subcutaneous/details https://www.rxlist.com/cosentyx-drug.htm#side_effects &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis , Ankylosing spondylitis Print This Page Health Reference Psoriasis Ankylosing spondylitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin