Jock itch | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Jock itch You are here: Home Jock itch Jock itch (tinea cruris) is a fungal infection that affects the skin of your inner thighs, buttocks and genitals. Jock itch causes an itchy, red, often ring-shaped rash in these warm, moist areas of your body. What is it? Jock itch (tinea cruris) is a fungal infection that affects the skin of your inner thighs, buttocks and genitals. Jock itch causes an itchy, red, often ring-shaped rash in these warm, moist areas of your body. Jock itch gets its name because it is common in people who sweat a lot, as do athletes. It also often occurs in people who are overweight, but anyone — even women — can get this infection. Although often uncomfortable and bothersome, jock itch usually isn't serious, except possibly for people with weak immune systems. Keeping your groin area clean and dry and applying topical antifungal medications are usually sufficient to treat jock itch. Symptoms The signs and symptoms of jock itch may include: Itching and redness in your groin, including your genitals, inner thighs, buttocks and anal area Burning sensation in affected areas Flaking, peeling or cracking skin in your groin Jock itch can make wearing underwear or tight clothing uncomfortable. Walking or exercising may aggravate the rash and worsen your signs and symptoms. Causes Jock itch is caused by fungi called dermatophytes. These microscopic organisms are normal inhabitants of your skin, and their growth stays in check as long as your skin is clean and dry. But on some areas of the body where skin is likely to be moist and warm, such as the groin, the fungi grow and thrive, resulting in a fungal infection. This infection is often caused by the same type of fungus that causes athlete's foot and sometimes ringworm of the scalp. In fact, the fungus that infects your groin area may be spread there from your own athlete's foot infection. Jock itch can spread from person to person by shared use of contaminated towels or clothing or through direct contact during sexual intercourse with someone who has the infection. Risk factors The organisms that cause jock itch thrive in damp, close environments. Warm, humid settings that promote heavy sweating — thus washing away fungus-killing oils, making the skin more permeable and in turn making the skin more prone to infection — favour its spread. Jock itch often affects more men than women. Men wearing tight underwear or athletic supporters that aren't washed after each use might help explain this gender difference. People who are obese or sweat a lot also are at higher risk of jock itch. People with impaired immune systems — such as people with diabetes or HIV/AIDS — also may be at increased risk of jock itch. If you have atopic dermatitis — a chronic, inherited skin disease characterized by itchy, inflamed skin — you may be more susceptible to jock itch. The barriers in your skin that normally protect you from viral, bacterial and fungal infections often are weakened or compromised. Diagnosis Your doctor can determine if you have jock itch or another skin disorder, such as a dermatitis or psoriasis . Your doctor may take skin scrapings or samples from the infected area and view them under a microscope. This is called a potassium hydroxide (KOH) test. If a sample shows fungi, treatment may include an antifungal medication. If the test is negative, but your doctor still suspects that you have jock itch, a sample may be sent to a lab to determine whether it will grow fungi under the right conditions. This test is known as a culture. Your doctor may also order a culture if your condition doesn't respond to treatment. References http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/psoriasis/ss/types-of-psoriasis https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/P/Psoriasis/Symptoms-of-psoriasis.html http://irishskinfoundation.ie/skin-conditions/how-is-psoriasis-treated http://www.medicinenet.com/psoriasis/article.htm Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Canesten HC Cream Canesten (Clotrimazole) Cream Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin