Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Cholesterol explained Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cholesterol Explained You are here: Home Cholesterol Explained Cholesterol is a waxy substance that's found in the fats (lipids) in your blood. While your body needs cholesterol to continue building healthy cells, having high cholesterol can increase your risk of heart disease. When you have high cholesterol, you may develop fatty deposits in your blood vessels. Eventually, these deposits make it difficult for enough blood to flow through your arteries. Your heart may not get as much oxygen-rich blood as it needs, which increases the risk of a heart attack. Decreased blood flow to your brain can cause a stroke. High cholesterol can be inherited, but is often preventable and treatable. A healthy diet, regular exercise and sometimes medication can go a long way toward reducing high cholesterol. High cholesterol has no symptoms. A blood test is the only way to detect high cholesterol. Cholesterol is carried through your blood, attached to proteins. This combination of proteins and cholesterol is called a lipoprotein. They are: Low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LDL, or "bad," cholesterol transports cholesterol particles throughout your body. Very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) . This type of lipoprotein contains the most triglycerides, a type of fat, attached to the proteins in your blood. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) . HDL, or "good," cholesterol picks up excess cholesterol and takes it back to your liver. Factors within your control — such as inactivity, obesity and an unhealthy diet — contribute to high LDL cholesterol and low HDL cholesterol. Factors beyond your control may play a role, too. For example, your genetic makeup may keep cells from removing LDL cholesterol from your blood efficiently or cause your liver to produce too much cholesterol. You're more likely to have high cholesterol that can lead to heart disease if you have any of these risk factors: Smoking, Obesity, Poor diet, Lack of exercise, High blood pressure, Diabetes or Family history of heart disease. Lifestyle changes such as exercising and eating a healthy diet are the first line of defense against high cholesterol. But, if you've made these important lifestyle changes and your total cholesterol — and particularly your LDL cholesterol — remains high, your doctor may recommend medication. Lifestyle changes are essential to improve your cholesterol level. To bring your numbers down, lose excess weight, eat healthy foods and increase your physical activity. If you smoke, quit. A Few natural products have been proven to reduce cholesterol, but some might be helpful - Artichoke, Barley, psyllium, Garlic,&nbsp; and Oat bran. The same heart-healthy lifestyle changes that can lower your cholesterol can help prevent you from having high cholesterol in the first place. To help prevent high cholesterol, you can: Lose extra pounds and maintain a healthy weight, Quit smoking, Eat a low-fat, low-salt diet that includes many fruits, vegetables and whole grains, Exercise on most days of the week for at least 30 minutes, Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all. Optimal Total cholesterol is 5mmol/L or under: Optimal LDL cholesterol is 3mmol?L or under: Optimal Triglycerides is 2mmol/L or under: Optimal HDL cholesterol is 1mmol/L or under for men and 1.2 mmol/L or under for women. If you have any questions ask me through our live pharmacist on the website. Garvan J. Lynch M.B.A. (Public Health) D.I.C. Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Excess Weight &amp; How to loose it What is a stroke? Stress - What you need to know. What is Metabolic Syndrome? What is Impotence (Erectile Dysfunction)? Cholestagel (colesevelam) Tablets Zocor (Simvastatin) Tablets Lescol (Fluvastatin) Capsules Crestor (Rosuvastatin) Tablets Ezetrol (Ezetimibe) Tablets Lipostat (Pravastatin) Medicine Reference Lipantil Micro Lipantil Supra Lipitor - Atorvastatin Lipostat Lescol Atorvas Atorvastatin Torvacol - (Atorvastatin) Torvan - (Atorvastatin) Crestor Rosuva - (Rosuvastatin) Rosuvastatin Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin