Colpermin, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Colpermin Capsules You are here: Home Colpermin Capsules Colpermin (Peppermint Oil) is used to relieve the spasm, bloating and cramping of Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Why have I been prescribed Colpermin? Colpermin (Peppermint Oil) is used to relieve the spasm, bloating and cramping of Irritable Bowel Syndrome. How does it work? Colpermin is an antispasmodic. That is to say, it is used to relieve the spasm and cramp which occurs in the large bowel in Irritable Bowel Syndrome. When and how do I take it? Do not chew or break the capsules. Take them whole with a glass of water. Do not eat food for 30 – 60 minutes after taking the capsules. Do not take them at the same time as indigestion remedies as they may damage the capsules. Colpermin capsules can sometimes break when pushed out of the pack. To avoid breakage, push the capsule gently from the side. Do not take capsules that have been broken. What’s the dose? If you do not have instructions from your Doctor or Pharmacist, the following dose may be taken: ADULTS: One capsule should be taken three times a day with a glass of water. Do not eat food for 30–60 minutes after taking the capsules. If the pain and discomfort is more severe, the dose can be increased to a maximum of two capsules three times a day. CHILDREN: NOT SUITABLE FOR CHILDREN There is no experience of these capsules in children under the age of 15 years, thus use cannot be recommended. Could it interact with other tablets? Antacids should not be administered at the same time as Colpermin. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Colpermin gastro-resistant hard capsules are usually well tolerated, though very occasionally heartburn and anal irritation can occur. If you have a tendency to suffer from heartburn and the capsules seem to make it worse, you should stop&nbsp;taking Colpermin and return to your Doctor or Pharmacist for advice. If the capsules are chewed or broken before being swallowed, the peppermint oil may irritate the mouth and gullet. In very rare instances where someone is allergic to peppermint oil or menthol, rash, headache, slow pulse rate, clumsiness and shaking can occur. These reactions may be associated with the taking of alcoholic drink. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Colpermin. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? There are no data available to establish the safety of Colpermin in pregnancy or lactation, therefore, it should be used only, if in the opinion of the practitioner, the possible benefits outweigh the possible hazards. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/1486 http://www.ibs-symptoms.ie/how-colpermin-works https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2138387.PPA1151_087_001.5349707e-59c7-4222-ab64-904438b9e8ac.000001Product%20leaflet%20approved.140324.pdf https://www.medipharm.ie/colpermin-gastro-resistant-20-capsules.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/diet-and-nutrition/a6453/colpermin-ibs-relief-peppermint-oil/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Irritable bowel syndrome Print This Page More Videos... Diverticulitis Irritable Bowel Syndrome Indigestion Overview Health Reference Irritable bowel syndrome Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin