Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Nalorex (naltrexon... Naprosyn EC Nardil Tablets Nasacort Nasal Spr... Naseptin Nasal Cre... Nasobec Nasal Spra... Nasofan Nasal Spra... Nasonex Nasal Spra... Naudicelle Nebilet Tablets Nebivolol 5mg Nebolol 5mg Neo-Cytamen Inject... Neo-Mercazole Tabl... Neoclarityn tablet... Neoral (ciclospori... Nepramel - (Esomep... Neulasta (pegfilgr... Neupogen (filgrast... Neupro Patch Neurontin Capsules Nexazole - Esomepr... Nexium Nitrolingual Spray Nizoral Cream Nizoral Shampoo Noctamid Tablets Nolpaza Nonsteroidal Anti-... Nordimet (Methotre... Noriday Tablets Norlevo 1.5mg Tabl... Normix (Rifaximin)... Nortem (Temazepam) Novomix 30 Flexpen NovoNorm 0.5mg (re... Novorapid Flexpen/... Nozinan (levomepro... Nu-Seals Aspirin 3... Nu-Seals Aspirin 7... Nuelin SA (Theophy... Nurofen for Childr... Nurofen for Childr... Nurofen for Childr... Nurofen Gel (OTC) Nurofen Liquid Cap... Nurofen Plus Table... Nurofen Tablets (O... Medicine - N Nalorex (naltrexone) Tablets Nalorex tablets contain the active ingredient naltrexone, which is a type of medicine called an opioid antagonist. It is used as part of the long-term treatment of addiction to opioid or opiate drugs such as heroin, methadone and morphine. The medicine is used to help people who were addicted to opioids to stay drug-free after they have gone through withdrawal or detox.&nbsp; &nbsp; Naprosyn EC Naprosyn EC (Naproxen) can be used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, ankylosing spondylitis (causing pain and stiffness in the back), back pain, neck pain, and swollen or painful tendons. It is also used to treat gout, sprained or strained muscles...... Nardil Tablets Nardil is used for the treatment of&nbsp; depression &nbsp;and is especially helpful in treating depression which does not follow the typical pattern, when anxiety or fear is a main symptom or when other treatments have not worked. &nbsp; Nasacort Nasal Spray Nasacort nasal spray contains the active ingredient triamcinolone, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Corticosteroids are hormones produced naturally by the adrenal glands that have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Naseptin Nasal Cream Naseptin contains an antibiotic and a disinfectant. Naseptin is used to treat and prevent infections in the nose. Naseptin works by killing certain bacteria that cause infections. Nasobec Nasal Spray Nasobec aqueous nasal spray contains the active ingredient beclometasone dipropionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Corticosteroids are hormones that are produced naturally by the adrenal glands and have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Nasofan Nasal Spray Nasofan nasal spray contains the active ingredient fluticasone propionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Corticosteroids are hormones produced naturally by the adrenal glands that have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Nasonex Nasal Spray Nasonex nasal spray contains the active ingredient mometasone, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Naudicelle Naudicelle consists of Evening Primrose Oil, Vitamin E (Tocopherols Mixed).&nbsp; Nebilet Tablets Nebilet (Nebivolol) tablets are used in the treatment of hypertension (high blood pressure) and chronic heart failure (CHF) i.e when the heart isn’t pumping enough blood to meet the body’s needs. Nebivolol 5mg Nebivolol tablets are used in the treatment of hypertension (high blood pressure) and chronic heart failure (CHF) i.e when the heart isn’t pumping enough blood to meet the body’s needs. Nebolol 5mg Nebol tablets are used in the treatment of hypertension (high blood pressure) and chronic heart failure (CHF) i.e when the heart isn’t pumping enough blood to meet the body’s needs. Neo-Cytamen Injection Hydroxocobalamin is an injectable form of vitamin B12 that is given when there are problems with absorption of this vitamin from the gut. Neo-Mercazole Tablets NeoMercazole (Carbomazole) is an anti-thyroid agent. It is used in all conditions where reduction of thyroid function is required. 1. Hyperthyroidism. 2. Preparation for thyroidectomy in hyperthyroidism. 3. Therapy before and aftert radio-iodine treatment. Neoclarityn tablets and oral solution Neoclarityn tablets and oral solution contain the active ingredient desloratadine, which is a type of medicine called a non-sedating antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine. Neoral (ciclosporin) Capsules/Liquid Neoral capsules and oral solution contain the active ingredient ciclosporin, which is a type of medicine called an immunosuppressant. It works by reducing the activity of the body's immune system. Nepramel - (Esomeprazole) Nepramel is used to treat various stomach problems involving irritation due to stomach acid. Nepramel is a generic brand of Nexium. Neulasta (pegfilgrastim) Neulasta (pegfilgrastim) is a colony-stimulating factor, a man-made form of a protein that stimulates the growth of white blood cells, used to decrease the incidence of infection, by treating neutropenia, a lack of certain white blood cells caused by receiving cancer chemotherapy. Neupogen (filgrastim) Injection Neupogen injection contains the active ingredient filgrastim, which is a type of medicine called a recombinant human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). G-CSF is a substance produced naturally by the body that stimulates the bone marrow to produce white blood cells known as neautrophils. Filgrastim is a man-made version of G-CSF. Neupro Patch Neupro (Rotigotine) is used for the treatment of the signs and symptoms of early-stage Parkinson's disease as monotherapy (i.e. without levodopa) or in combination with levodopa. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin