Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All MabCampath Mabthera Macrodantin - (Nit... Madopar Capsules Malarone Tablets Manerix Marviol Tablets Maxidex Drops/Oint... Maxitrol Drops/Oin... Maxolon (Metoclopr... Medrone tablets (m... Mefac Capsules Melatonin Melfen Tablets (Ib... Memantine Tablets Menopur Injection Meptid Tablets Mercilon Tablets Mesalazine Tablets Mestinon (Pyridost... Metanium Ointment Metformin Tablets Methotrexate Table... Metocor (Metoprolo... Mexilitine Capsule... Mezavant XL Tablet... Mianserin Micardis Tablets MicardisPlus Table... Microlax Microlite Tablets Minocin SA Minodene - (Minocy... Minosil - (Minocyc... Minox - (Minocycli... Minulet Tablets Mirabegron Tablets Miramel (pramipexo... Mirap - (Mirtazapi... Mirapexin Tablets Mirena Coil (I.U.D... Mobic Tablets Modigraf (Tacrolim... Moduret tablets Mogadon Tablets Molipaxin Capsules Monopost unit dose... Monotrim Tablets/S... Montelukast Tablet... Morning-After Pill Motilium Movicol Movicol Paediatric Moviprep Muse (Alprostadil) Mycostatin - (Nyst... Mysoline - (Primid... Medicine - M MabCampath MabCampath is used to treat patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL), a cancer of the lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is used in patients for whom treatment combinations including fludarabine (another medicine used in leukaemia) are not appropriate. Mabthera MabThera (Rituximab) may be used for the treatment of three different conditions: Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma, Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and Rheumatoid arthritis. Macrodantin - (Nitrofurantoin) Most urine infections are caused by bacteria that come from your own bowel. They are usually easily treated with a short course of an antibacterial medicine such as Macrodantin. Madopar Capsules Madopar capsules contain two medicines called levodopa and benserazide. They are used to treat Parkinson’s disease. Malarone Tablets Malarone tablets contain two active ingredients, proguanil hydrochloride and atovaquone. These are both medicines that are active against the parasite that causes malaria. Manerix Manerix contains a medicine called Moclobemide. This belongs to a group of medicines called antidepressants. Manerix is used to treat depression and social phobia. Marviol Tablets Marviol is a combined oral contraceptive (‘the combined Pill’). Each tablet contains a small amount of two different female hormones. These are desogestrel (a progestogen) and ethinylestradiol (an estrogen). Maxidex Drops/Ointment Maxidex eye drops contain the active ingredient dexamethasone. Dexamethasone belongs to a group of medicines known as corticosteroids that are used for reducing inflammation. Maxitrol Drops/Ointment Maxitrol eye drops and ointment both contain three active ingredients, dexamethasone, neomycin and polymyxin B. Dexamethasone belongs to a group of medicines known as corticosteroids that are used for reducing inflammation. Neomycin and polymyxin B are antibiotics that are included in these drops to prevent infections with bacteria. Maxolon (Metoclopramide) Metoclopramide is used to help prevent you from feeling or being sick.&nbsp;Metoclopramide may make you feel drowsy. If this happens do not drive and do not use tools or machines until you feel well again. If you experience any unusual movements of your body, head, face or eyes, speak with your doctor or pharmacist straightaway.&nbsp;To reduce the chances of you experiencing these side-effects, metoclopramide should not normally be taken for more than five days in a row. Medrone tablets (methylprednisolone) Medrone tablets contain the active ingredient methylprednisolone, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid. Corticosteroids are hormones that are produced naturally by the adrenal glands. They have many important functions in the body, including control of inflammatory responses. Mefac Capsules Mefac is used to relieve pain and inflammation in a wide range of musculoskeletal conditions, including those below. It can also be used to relieve&nbsp; some other types of pain, and to reduce blood loss in women with very heavy periods. Melatonin Melatonin is a natural, non-addicting hormone supplement that assists with sleep. Melfen Tablets (Ibuprofen) Ibuprofen helps to reduce inflammation and to reduce pain. Ibuprofen can take a few weeks to help improve inflammation but can start to relieve pain after the first few doses. Memantine Tablets Ebixa is a drug prescribed to treat moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. Menopur Injection Menopur (Menotrophin) is used to treat infertility in men and women. Meptid Tablets Meptid tablets and injection contain the active ingredient meptazinol, which is a type of medicine called an opioid analgesic (painkiller). It is related to morphine. Mercilon Tablets Mercilon tablets are a type of hormonal contraception commonly known as 'the pill' or combined oral contraceptive pill. Mercilon tablets contain two active ingredients, ethinylestradiol and desogestrel. These are synthetic versions of the naturally occurring female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Ethinylestradiol is a synthetic version of oestrogen and desogestrel is a 'third generation' synthetic form of progesterone. Mesalazine Tablets Mesalazine is an anti-inflammatory medicine used to treat ulcerative colitis and to prevent further episodes of Crohn’s disease. Mestinon (Pyridostigmine) Mestinon tablets contain the active ingredient pyridostigmine bromide, which is a type of medicine called an anticholinesterase. It works by prolonging the action of a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin