Camcolit Tablets, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Camcolit Tablets You are here: Home Camcolit Tablets Camcolit tablets contain the active ingredient lithium carbonate, which is a type of medicine known as a mood stabiliser. What is it used for? Treatment and prevention of mania and hypomania As a 'mood stabiliser' to prevent episodes of depression and mania in people with bipolar affective disorder (manic depression). Treatment and prevention of recurrent depression when treatment with other antidepressants is unsuccessful Aggressive or self-harming behaviour How does it work? Camcolit tablets contain the active ingredient lithium carbonate, which is a type of medicine known as a mood stabiliser. The way lithium works as a mood stabilising agent is still not fully understood. It is thought that it modifies the production and turnover of certain chemical compounds called neurotransmitters that are found in the brain. Neurotransmitters are involved in transmitting messages between the nerve cells in the brain. Serotonin is one example of a neurotransmitter, as is dopamine. It is thought that lithium may affect the activity of these compounds in the brain. Lithium is used in several ways. People with bipolar affective disorder (manic depression) suffer from episodes of severe mood swings, which range from abnormally high mood and extreme excitement (mania) to deep depression. Lithium is used to treat the mania, and to stabilise mood after an acute episode of mood swings to decrease the frequency and intensity of these episodes. Lithium is also used to treat recurrent depression that has not been responsive to other antidepressants, and aggressive and self-harming or self-mutilating behaviour. Camcolit 400 tablets are controlled release tablets that are designed to release the lithium slowly and continuously over several hours. This produces a steady blood level of the medicine throughout the day. The tablets can be broken in half, but they must be swallowed with water and not chewed or crushed, as this would damage the controlled release action. Use with caution in Elderly people Psoriasis Abnormal muscle weakness (myaesthenia gravis) Not to be used in Decreased kidney function Heart disease Untreated underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) People with low levels of salt (sodium) in the body, for example due to dehydration, low sodium diets or Addison's disease Breastfeeding This medicine is not recommended for children under 12 years of age. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine may be harmful to a developing foetus. It should not normally be given to pregnant women, particularly during the first trimester, unless the potential benefits outweigh the potential risks to the foetus. Seek medical advice from your doctor. This medicine passes into breast milk and could have harmful effects on a nursing infant. Mothers who need to take this medicine should not breastfeed. Seek medical advice from your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Gut disturbances such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea Shaking, usually of the hands (tremor) Thirst Increased production of urine (polyuria) Weight gain Excessive fluid retention in the body tissues, resulting in swelling (oedema) Muscle weakness Dizziness Dazed feeling Decreased kidney function Underactivity of the thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) - this may make you feel very tired or slow and you may notice the cold more, tell your doctor if you experience this Worsening of psoriasis Lithium toxicity if your lithium level is too high - for warning symptoms see the warning above Abnormal heart rhythms Sexual problems Memory problems The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the drug's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. The following medicines may increase the level of lithium in the blood, causing an increased risk of lithium side effects or toxicity: ACE inhibitors, such as lisinopril, captopril, enalapril angiotensin II receptor antagonists, such as losartan, candesartan, valsartan diuretics, such as bendroflumethiazide, furosemide metronidazole non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, celecoxib tetracycline antibiotics, such as tetracycline, doxycycline. There may be an increased risk of side effects unrelated to the lithium level if the following medicines are taken with lithium: antipsychotic medicines, eg clozapine, thioridazine, flupentixol, haloperidol calcium channel blockers, eg diltiazem, verapamil carbamazepine maprotiline methyldopa phenytoin tricyclic antidepressants, eg amitriptyline SSRI antidepressants, eg fluoxetine, fluvoxamine. The following medicines may decrease the blood level of lithium, making it less effective: antacids that contain sodium, eg sodium bicarbonate theophylline. References: https://www.evidence.nhs.uk/formulary/bnf/current/4-central-nervous-system/42-drugs-used-in-psychoses-and-related-disorders/423-drugs-used-for-mania-and-hypomania/lithium/lithium-carbonate/camcolit http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/depression/a6361/camcolit/ http://www.hse.ie/eng/about/Who/clinical/natclinprog/medicinemanagementprogramme/yourmedicines/PatientInformation/PatientInformation.pdf https://www.drugs.com/answers/lithium-camcolit-weight-gain-3015551.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Depression , Bipolar Disorder Print This Page Health Reference Depression Bipolar Disorder Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin