Avandia, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Avandia You are here: Home Avandia Avandia is used to treat type 2 diabetes. Avandia helps to reduce your blood sugar towards a normal level, by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Avandia can be used alone or in combination with other medicines to treat diabetes (such as Glucophage or Amaryl). Why have I been prescribed Avandia? Avandia is used to treat type 2 diabetes. Avandia helps to reduce your blood sugar towards a normal level, by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Avandia can be used alone or in combination with other medicines to treat diabetes (such as Glucophage or Amaryl). How does it work? Avandia makes your body more sensitive to the insulin it produces thereby increasing the uptake and utilisation of glucose. When and how do I take it? Rosiglitazone may be given once or twice a day. Swallow the tablets with some water. You can take Avandia with or without food. Take your tablets around the same time every day and follow any dietary advice that your doctor has given you. What’s the dose? Avandia therapy is usually initiated at 4 mg/day. This dose can be increased to 8 mg/day after eight weeks if greater glycaemic control is required. Could they interact with other tablets? Phenytoin carbamazepine phenobarbital St John's wort rifampicin gemfibrozi can all have an affect Amaryl therefore you should always tell your doctor/ pharmacist you are taking Amaryl. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Common side effects include: Chest pain ( angina ) broken bones reduction in blood count ( anaemia ) small increases in blood cholesterol increased amount of fats in the blood increased weight increased appetite constipation swelling (oedema) due to water retention Hypoglycaemia may also be a risk (low blood sugar levels) especially if taking Avandia with other anti diabetic medications. Possible symptoms of hypoglycaemia include: headache ravenous hunger nausea vomiting lassitude sleepiness disordered sleep restlessness aggressiveness impaired concentration alertness and reaction time depression confusion speech and visual disorders aphasia tremor paresis sensory disturbances dizziness helplessness loss of self-control delirium cerebral convulsions somnolence and loss of consciousness up to and including coma shallow respiration and bradycardia. In addition, signs of adrenergic counter-regulation may be present such as sweating, clammy skin, anxiety , tachycardia, hypertension , palpitations, angina pectoris and cardiac arrhythmias. Symptoms can almost always be promptly controlled by immediate intake carbohydrates (sugar). Artificial sweeteners have no effect. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Avandia. However you should ask your doctor/pharmacist first as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Avandia should not be used during pregnancy. Avandia should not be used in women who are breast-feeding. If you have any further questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiazolidinedione http://www.drugs.com/avandia.html http://www.drugwatch.com/avandia/ http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm376516.htm http://www.rxlist.com/avandia-drug.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes - Type 2 Print This Page More Videos... Diabetes Treatment Options Health Reference Diabetes - Type 2 Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin