Lynch Pharmacy, Broadale Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Celance Tablets You are here: Home Celance Tablets Celance (Pergolide) is one in a group of medicines called dopamine agonists. It is used to treat Parkinson's disease, sometimes with other medicines. Celance is used to reduce the symptoms and problems of Parkinson’s disease after your doctor has tried an alternative medicine. Why have I been prescribed Celance? Celance (Pergolide) is one in a group of medicines called dopamine agonists. It is used to treat Parkinson's disease , sometimes with other medicines. Celance is used to reduce the symptoms and problems of Parkinson’s disease after your doctor has tried an alternative medicine. How does it work? Celance mimics the effect of dopamine in the brain which helps control body movements. When and how do I take it? You can take Celance with or without food. It is advised that you swallow your tablets with water. What’s the dose? Your doctor will probably tell you to start on a low dose of one ivory tablet (50 microgram) for the first one or two days. After that your doctor will usually tell you to increase the dose every third or fourth day over a period of several weeks. You will usually take the tablets 3 times a day, and at regular intervals. Do not take more than 3 pink tablets (3 x 1000 microgram tablets) per day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist about all the medicines you are taking, have recently taken or plan to take, including prescription and non-prescription medicines, dietary supplements and herbal remedies. Your doctor will decide if you can take Celance with your other medicines. If you take Celance at the same time as some other medicines (see examples below), the&nbsp;treatment with these medicines or Celance may be affected and so caution is needed. Medicines that include levodopa such as Sinemet or Madopar. You may experience&nbsp;uncontrollable movements (shaking and twitching), confusion, or hallucinations. Medicines known as dopamine antagonists such as phenothiazines, butyrophenones,&nbsp;thioxanthines, used to treat psychiatric disorders or the anti-emetic drug&nbsp;metoclopramide used to prevent being sick. These medicines may affect how well&nbsp;Celance works. Medicines that are known to affect protein binding. These medicines may affect the&nbsp;way Celance works. Warfarin, this may affect the way your blood clots. Your doctor will need to monitor&nbsp;you. Medicines that are used in the treatment of high blood pressure. Your blood pressure&nbsp;may drop when standing or rising suddenly. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Celance can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Very common side effect (affecting more than one person in ten): Heart valve and related&nbsp;disorders e.g. inflammation (pericarditis) or leaking of fluid in the pericardium (pericardial effusion). The early symptoms may be one or more of the following: difficulty breathing, shortness of breath, chest or back pain and swollen legs. If you experience any one of these symptoms, you must tell your doctor immediately. If you stop taking Celance suddenly, this may cause side effects such as unexplained fever probably with faster breathing, sweating, muscle stiffness or sleepiness. These could be signs of a serious side effect called neuroleptic malignant syndrome. You may also faint or feel faint, dizzy or light-headed when you get up or stand up. You may feel sick when you first start to take your medicine. This usually wears off but your&nbsp;doctor may give you something to help this. Very common side effects (more than 1 in 10 patients) are: shaking and twitching feeling or being sick hallucinations sleepiness dizziness confusion constipation Common side effects (more than 1 in 100 patients) are : pains indigestion stomach ache difficulty breathing difficulty in sleeping swelling and irritation inside the nose double vision swollen legs diarrhoea chest or back pain feeling your heartbeat (palpitations) fainting faster heart beat ( tachycardia ) Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Celance. Sedative effect may be increased however. Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Celance should not be used during pregnancy, unless your doctor has advised you to&nbsp;do so. It is not known if Celance can pass into breast milk. Therefore you should avoid&nbsp;taking Celance if you are breastfeeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celanese https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/PIL.2413.latest.pdf?isAttachment=true&amp;documentid=2413 http://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/589/SPC/Celance+50,+250,+1000+microgram+tablets.+-+Product+discontinued/%23INDICATIONS &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Parkinson&#039;s disease , Parkinsonism Print This Page Health Reference Parkinson&#039;s disease Parkinsonism Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin