Listeria infection | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Listeria infection You are here: Home Listeria infection It&#039;s possible that you&#039;ve had a food-borne illness called listeria infection (listeriosis) and not even known it. That&#039;s because when this illness causes symptoms, they&#039;re usually mild and can be easily mistaken for other illnesses, such as flu. What is it? It's possible that you've had a food-borne illness called listeria infection (listeriosis) and not even known it. That's because when this illness causes symptoms, they're usually mild and can be easily mistaken for other illnesses, such as flu . Most healthy people exposed to listeria don't become ill, but a listeria infection can be devastating for pregnant women and people with weak immune systems.&nbsp;Prompt antibiotic treatment can help curb the effects of a listeria infection. Prevention is key, however, starting with simple food safety precautions. Symptoms If you develop a listeria infection, you may experience: Fever Muscle aches Nausea Diarrhoea Symptoms may begin a few days after you've eaten contaminated food, but it may take as long as two months before the first signs and symptoms of infection begin. If the listeria infection spreads to your nervous system, signs and symptoms may include: Headache Stiff neck Confusion or changes in alertness Loss of balance Convulsions Symptoms during pregnancy, for newborns During pregnancy, a listeria infection is likely to cause only mild signs and symptoms in the mother. The consequences for the baby, however, may be devastating. The baby may die unexpectedly before birth or experience a life-threatening infection within the first few days after birth. As in adults, the signs and symptoms of a listeria infection in a newborn can be subtle, but may include: Little interest in feeding Irritability Fever Vomiting Causes Listeria infections are caused by eating food contaminated with the bacteria Listeria monocytogenes, which can be found in: Soil Water Some wild and domestic animals Humans are often exposed to listeria by consuming: Raw vegetables that have been contaminated from the soil or from contaminated manure used as fertilizer Infected animal meat Unpasteurized milk or foods made with unpasteurized milk Certain processed foods — such as soft cheeses, hot dogs and deli meats that have been contaminated after processing Unborn babies can contract a listeria infection from the mother via the placenta. Breast-feeding is not considered a potential cause of infection. Risk factors Those at highest risk of a listeria infection include: Pregnant women and their babies . Pregnant women are significantly more susceptible to listeria infections than are other healthy adults. In fact, nearly one-third of listeria infections occur during pregnancy, according to the Centres for Disease Control and infection prevention (CDC). Although a listeria infection may cause only a mild illness in the mother, consequences for the baby may include miscarriage, stillbirth, premature birth or a potentially fatal infection after birth. People who have weak immune systems . This includes older adults and anyone who has AIDS, cancer, diabetes, kidney disease or other conditions that affect the immune system, as well as those who take medications to block rejection of a transplanted organ. Complications Most listeria infections are so mild they may go unnoticed. However, in some cases, a listeria infection can lead to life-threatening complications — including: A generalized blood infection (septicemia) Inflammation of the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain ( meningitis ) Complications of a listeria infection may be most severe for an unborn baby. Early in pregnancy, a listeria infection may lead to miscarriage. Later in pregnancy, a listeria infection may lead to stillbirth, premature birth or a potentially fatal infection in the baby after birth — even if the mother becomes only mildly ill. Infants who survive a listeria infection may experience long-term neurological damage and delayed development. Adults over 60 can also be seriously affected by a listeria infection, and death rates may be as high as 10 to 20 percent for this age group. Diagnosis A blood test is often the most effective way to determine whether you have a listeria infection. In some cases, samples of spinal fluid, urine or the fluid that surrounds and protects a baby before birth (amniotic fluid) may be tested as well. References http://www.about-listeria.com/listeria_symptoms_risks/#.V1Aa3LTG71s http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/ http://www.medicinenet.com/listeria/article.htm http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/965841-overview Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Cefodox (Cefpodoxime) Tablets Tetralysal (Lymecycline) Capsules Suprax (Cefixime) Tablets Normix (Rifaximin) Tablets Minocin (Minocycline) Capsules/Tablets Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin