Centyl, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Centyl Tablets You are here: Home Centyl Tablets Centyl (Bendroflumethiazide) tablets are used to control high blood pressure. They are also used for problems where there is too much water in your body. The medical name for this is ‘oedema’. Why have I been prescribed Centyl? Centyl (Bendroflumethiazide) tablets are used to control high blood pressure . They are also used for problems where there is too much water in your body. The medical name for this is ‘oedema’. How does it work? This is one of a group of medicines known as diuretics ("water tablets"). Centyl reduces the amount of water in your body, getting rid of any excess water via the kidneys, by increasing the amount of urine you produce. This also reduces the amount of salts in your body and together these actions can lower blood pressure. When and how do I take it? The tablets are usually taken as a single dose. Take the tablet(s) whole with at least 100 ml (a small cupful) of water. Stick to the dose your doctor tells you. Take your tablet at the same time each day. This makes it easier to remember it. Most people take their tablet in the morning. Your doctor may change the number of tablets you take. This will depend on how well you respond to the treatment. What’s the dose? The dose will depend on your particular condition. Your doctor may give you between 2.5 mg and 10 mg at the start of your treatment. Your dose will normally be reduced to 2.5 mg or 5 mg daily, depending on your response. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your doctor if you are taking medicines for: blood pressure heart problems diabetes inflammation or pain (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines) the removal of uric acid (the substance that causes gout) from the body high cholesterol irregular heartbeat depression (as you should not take Centyl tablets if you are taking lithium) You should not take Centyl tablets if you are taking medicines that make you sensitive to light. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Centyl tablets can cause side effects. These are usually not serious but contact your doctor immediately if you develop any of the following more serious side effects: severe abdominal pain vomiting and back pain severe pain in the head, chest, or pelvic area skin sores. Contact your doctor as soon as possible if you have any of the following less serious problems: headache dizziness faintness (especially if standing up quickly) tiredness problems passing urine unusual thirst and dry mouth stomach upset a general malaise any bleeding problems excessive bruising increase in infections (particularly sore throats) or gout . Other possible side effects are muscle cramps, skin rashes, prickling sensations, skin reactions to strong light, worsening of any short sightedness or difficulty for a man in achieving an erection. It is normal to pass urine more often after taking the tablets. This is the usual way to get rid of excess water in your body. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? You are more likely to have a drop in blood pressure on standing or sitting up if you drink alcohol while you are being treated with Centyl. Depending on what other medication you are taking you may not be able to drink alcohol. Discuss this with your doctor. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Tell your doctor before you are given the tablets if you are pregnant, might be pregnant or you are breastfeeding as you should not take Centyl. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.google.ie/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&amp;ion=1&amp;espv=2&amp;ie=UTF-8#q=bendrofluazide http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2118273.PA0046_019_001.427d7c83-39bc-43fd-adb3-6956ca0775b3.000001centylpil.141020.pdf http://www.drugs.com/cdi/bendroflumethiazide.html http://www.drugs.com/cdi/bendroflumethiazide.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bendroflumethiazide &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin