Difene Gel, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Difene Gel You are here: Home Difene Gel Diclac (Diclofenac) gel are used to relieve pain and inflammation. It is used to relieve painful conditions associated with your bones and joints and to reduce swelling and inflammation (e.g. arthritis) and for sprains, strains and bruising of tendons and ligaments, and in acute gout. Why have I been prescribed Difene gel? Difene (Diclofenac) gel is used to relieve pain and inflammation. It is used to relieve painful conditions associated with your bones and joints and to reduce&nbsp;swelling and inflammation&nbsp; (e.g. arthritis) &nbsp;and for sprains, strains and bruising of tendons and ligaments, and in&nbsp; acute gout. It can also be used to reduce pain or inflammation after surgery. It can also be used for period pain. How does it work? Difene blocks the production of chemicals in the body called prostaglandins which are responsible for pain and inflammation. When and how do I take it? Always use this medicine exactly as described in this leaflet or as your doctor, pharmacist or nurse has told you. Check with your doctor, pharmacist or nurse if you are not sure. It is important to use the lowest dose which adequately controls your inflammation/pain and for the shortest possible period of time. Never exceed the recommended dose. Do not take by mouth. Be careful not to get the gel into your eyes. If&nbsp;this happens rinse your eyes with clean water&nbsp;and tell your doctor. Difene Gel must be applied to intact skin&nbsp;and not be rubbed into open wounds, cuts or&nbsp;any other area where the skin is abnormal. After rubbing the gel into the skin, do not cover&nbsp;with bandages or sticking plaster. What’s the dose? The dose will depend on your complaint and strength of the gel prescribed. Usually apply two or three time a day. Could it interact with other tablets? If you are taking other medicines make sure your doctor is aware of them before you apply Difene gel, particularly if they are any of the following: other anti-inflammatory or ”painkilling” medicines water tablets e.g. diuretics corticosteroids or other medicines that may upset your stomach blood tablets e.g. anticoagulants such as warfarin lithium, cyclosporin and methotrexate anti-platelet agents e.g. aspirin medicines for heart conditions or&nbsp; high blood pressure &nbsp;(Beta Blockers, ACE inhibitors, digoxin) quinolone antibiotics aminoglycosides e.g. streptomycin diabetic tablets drugs for the treatment of gout e.g. probenecid drugs for the treatment of&nbsp; depression &nbsp;e.g. selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors If you are presently taking any of these medicines and are unsure talk to your doctor or&nbsp;pharmacist. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Some rare or very rare side effects can be serious. Stop using Difene Gel and tell your doctor straightaway or go to the emergency department at your nearest hospital if any of the following happens: allergic reaction with swelling of the face, lips, mouth, tongue or throat often associated with rash and itching, which may cause difficulty to swallow, hypotension (low blood pressure), fainting, wheezing and feelings of tightness in the chest (signs of asthma). red or purple skin (possible signs of blood vessel inflammation), skin rash with blisters, blistering of the lips, eyes and mouth,&nbsp;skin inflammation with flaking or peeling. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between Difene and alcohol. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Diclac should not be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: 1. Medicines.ie website- difene SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/3639/SPC/Difene+Tablets/ 2. Medicines.ie- difene PIL http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/8293/PIL/Difene+Tablets/&nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Arthritis , Gout Print This Page Health Reference Arthritis Gout Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin