Liver cysts | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Liver cysts You are here: Home Liver cysts Simple liver cysts — fluid-filled cavities in the liver — usually cause no signs or symptoms and need no treatment. However, they may enlarge enough to cause pain or discomfort in the upper right part of the abdomen. What is it? Simple liver cysts — fluid-filled cavities in the liver — usually cause no signs or symptoms and need no treatment. However, they may enlarge enough to cause pain or discomfort in the upper right part of the abdomen. Simple liver cysts are always benign. The only patients who require treatment for liver cysts are those who develop symptoms. Larger cysts may occasionally cause some dull pain and/or swelling in the upper right hand side of the abdomen. Jaundice , which is often caused by bile duct obstruction, is rare. Liver cysts do not impair the liver's ability to function. Most liver cysts can be detected on ultrasound or computerized tomography (CT) scans. When needed, treatment may include drainage or removal of the cyst. The cause of simple liver cysts isn't known, but they may be present at birth (congenital). Rarely, liver cysts may indicate a serious, underlying condition such as: Polycystic liver disease, an inherited disorder Echinococcus infection, a parasitic infection Liver cancer If required, to reduce their size, fluid can be removed from the cyst by inserting a needle through the skin under X-ray guidance and withdrawing (aspirating) the fluid. To prevent the fluid refilling the cyst a substance called sclerosant is injected into the cyst to help keep the walls of the cyst together. Symptoms In most cases, simple liver cysts do not causes any symptoms, however some patients can experience: Upper abdominal fullness Discomfort Pain What causes it? Simple cysts arise from a malformation of your bile ducts. These cysts are thought to be congenital (present from birth) but they are not inherited and are unrelated to polycystic liver disease in which many more cysts are present.&nbsp; References http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/liver-disease/liver_cysts_tumors http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/190818-overview http://www.britishlivertrust.org.uk/liver-information/liver-conditions/benign-tumours-and-cystic-disease/ Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin