Hay fever | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Hay fever You are here: Home Hay fever Hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis, causes cold-like signs and symptoms such as a runny nose, congestion, sneezing and sinus pressure. But unlike a cold, hay fever isn&#039;t caused by a virus. Hay fever is caused by an allergic response to outdoor or indoor allergens. What is it? Hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis, causes cold-like signs and symptoms such as a runny nose, congestion, sneezing and sinus pressure. But unlike a cold, hay fever isn't caused by a virus. Hay fever is caused by an allergic response to outdoor or indoor allergens, such as pollen, dust mites or pet dander. Hay fever is common — it affects more than 1 in 5 people. Some people have symptoms year-round. For others, hay fever symptoms get worse at certain times of the year, usually in the spring, summer or fall. Hay fever can make you miserable and affect your performance at work or school, and interfere with leisure activities. But you don't have to put up with annoying symptoms. Learning how to avoid triggers and finding the right treatment can make a big difference. Symptoms Hay fever symptoms usually start immediately after you're exposed to a specific allergy-causing substance ( allergen ) and can include: Runny nose and nasal congestion Watery or itchy eyes Sneezing Cough Itchy nose, roof of mouth or throat Sinus pressure and facial pain Swollen, blue-colored skin under the eyes (allergic shiners) Decreased sense of smell or taste Your hay fever symptoms may start or worsen at a particular time of year, triggered by tree pollen, grasses or weeds, which all bloom at different times. If you're sensitive to indoor allergens, such as dust mites, cockroaches, mold or pet dander, you may have year-round symptoms. Many people have allergy symptoms all year long, but their symptoms get worse during certain times of the year. Although hay fever can begin at any age, you're most likely to develop it during childhood or early adulthood. It's common for the severity of hay fever reactions to change over the years. For most people, hay fever symptoms tend to diminish slowly, often over decades. Causes During a process called sensitization, your immune system mistakenly identifies a harmless airborne substance as something harmful. Your immune system then starts producing antibodies to this harmless substance. The next time you come in contact with the substance, these antibodies recognize it and signal your immune system to release chemicals such as histamine into your bloodstream. These immune system chemicals cause a reaction that leads to the irritating signs and symptoms of hay fever. Seasonal hay fever triggers include: Tree pollen, common in the spring Grass pollen, common in the late spring and summer Weed pollen, common in the fall Spores from fungi and molds, which can be worse during warm-weather months Year-round hay fever triggers include: Dust mites or cockroaches Dander (dried skin flakes and saliva) from pets such as cats, dogs or birds Spores from indoor and outdoor fungi and molds Hay fever doesn't mean you're allergic to hay. Despite its name, hay fever is almost never triggered by hay, and it doesn't cause a fever. Risk factors The following factors may increase your risk of developing hay fever: Having other allergies or asthma Having a blood relative (such as a parent or sibling) with allergies or asthma Being male Being exposed to cigarette smoke during your first year of life Living or working in an environment that constantly exposes you to allergens — such as animal dander Complications Problems that may be associated with hay fever include: Reduced quality of life . Hay fever can interfere with your enjoyment of activities and cause you to be less productive. For many people, hay fever symptoms lead to absences from work or school. Poor sleep . Hay fever symptoms can keep you awake or make it hard to stay asleep. Worsening asthma . If you have asthma, hay fever can worsen signs and symptoms such as coughing and wheezing. Sinusitis . Prolonged sinus congestion due to hay fever may increase your susceptibility to sinusitis — an infection or inflammation of the membrane that lines the sinuses. Ear infection . In children, hay fever often is a factor in middle ear infection (otitis media). Diagnosis Positive reaction to allergy testYour doctor will ask detailed questions about your personal and family medical history, your signs and symptoms, and your usual way of treating them. Your doctor will also perform a physical examination to look for additional clues about the causes of your signs and symptoms. He or she may also recommend one or both of the following tests: Skin prick test . During skin testing, small amounts of material that can trigger allergies are pricked into the skin of your arm or upper back and you're observed for signs of an allergic reaction. If you're allergic, you develop a raised bump (hive) at the test location on your skin. Allergy specialists usually are best equipped to perform allergy skin tests. Allergy blood test . A blood test (sometimes called the radioallergosorbent, or RAST, test) can measure your immune system's response to a specific allergen. The test measures the amount of allergy-causing antibodies in your bloodstream, known as immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies. A blood sample is sent to a medical laboratory, where it can be tested for evidence of sensitivity to possible allergens. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allergic_rhinitis http://www.medicinenet.com/hay_fever/article.htm http://allergy-ireland.ie/hay-fever/ http://www.hayfever-relief.com http://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/H/Hay-fever/Treating-hay-fever.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Drynol Clarityn allergy tablets (Loratadine) Eye Complaints Medicine Reference Zirpine - (Cetirizine) Zirtek - (Cetirizine) Zirtene - (Cetirizine) Clareeze - (Loratadine) Clarityn - (Loratadine) Neoclarityn tablets and oral solution Telfast Tablets Piriton - (Chlorphenamine) Beconase Nasal Spray Dymista Nasal Spray Flixonase Nasal Spray Nasobec Nasal Spray Nasofan Nasal Spray Nasonex Nasal Spray Rhinocort Nasal Spray Rhinolast Nasal Spray Phenergan Tablets/Syrup Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin