Catapres, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Catapres Tablets You are here: Home Catapres Tablets Catapres (Clonidine) is used to lower high blood pressure (to treat hypertension). Why have I been prescribed Catapres? Catapres (Clonidine) is used to lower high blood pressure (to treat hypertension ). How does it work? Catapres tablets contain a medicine called clonidine. This belongs to a group of medicines called antihypertensives. It widens the blood vessels making it easier for blood to flow through them. When and how do I take it? Always take CATAPRES exactly as your doctor has told you. You should check with&nbsp;your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. Your doctor will start you on a low dose and gradually increase it. This will depend&nbsp;on how well your medicine works to control your blood pressure. Take this medicine by mouth with a glass of water. Usually taken in the morning . What’s the dose? The usual starting dose is between 50 micrograms and 100 micrograms, three times a day&nbsp;If necessary, your doctor will gradually increase the dose. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other&nbsp;medicines. This includes medicines that you buy without a prescription and herbal&nbsp;medicines. This is because CATAPRES can affect the way some other medicines work. Also some other medicines can affect the way CATAPRES works. In particular, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of the following medicines: Other medicines that make you drowsy Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs ( NSAIDs ) such as ibuprofen Medicines for depression such as imipramine or mirtazapine Medicines for severe mental illness such as schizophrenia . These are also known as ‘antipsychotics’ and include chlorpromazine. Please also tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of the following&nbsp;medicines for high blood pressure or other heart problems: Beta blockers such as atenolol Water tablets (‘diuretics’) such as frusemide Alpha blockers such as prazosin or doxazosin. These can also be used for prostate problems in men Vasodilators such as diazoxide or sodium nitroprusside Calcium antagonists such as verapamil or diltiazem hydrochloride ACE inhibitors such as captopril or lisinopril Digitalis glycosides such as digoxin Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, CATAPRES can cause side effects, although not everybody gets&nbsp;them. Very common (affects more than 1 in 10 people): Dizziness, feeling tired and more relaxed than usual (sedation) Feeling dizzy when you stand up (because your blood pressure has fallen sharply) Dry mouth Common (affects less than in 1 in 10 people, more than 1 in 100 people): Depression , sleeping problems Headache Constipation , feeling sick (nausea), pain below the ear (from the salivary gland), being sick (vomiting) Erectile dysfunction Fatigue Uncommon (affects less than 1 in 100 people, more than 1 in 1,000 people): Problems with understanding what is happening around you, hallucinations, nightmares Your hands and feet feeling different (‘altered sensation’) Regular unusually slow heart beat Raynaud’s phenomenon (a problem with circulation to the fingers and toes) Itching, rash, urticaria (nettle rash) A feeling of discomfort and fatigue (‘malaise’) Can I drink alcohol while taking it? This medicine may increase the effects of alcohol. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? This product should only be used in pregnancy if considered essential by the physician. Careful monitoring of mother and child is recommended. The use of Catapres while breast feeding is not recommended as there is not enough known about possible effects on the baby. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clonidine http://www.drugs.com/catapres.html http://www.rxlist.com/catapres-drug.htm http://www.medicinenet.com/clonidine-oral/article.htm https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/3885 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin