Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Etrivex Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Etrivex Shampoo You are here: Home Etrivex Shampoo Topical treatment of moderate scalp psoriasis in adults. What is it used for? Treatment of moderate scalp psoriasis in adults. How does it work? Etrivex shampoo contains the active ingredient clobetasol propionate, which is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. Corticosteroids are medicines used for reducing inflammation. Inflammation of the skin happens due to irritation of the skin, and is caused by the release of various substances that are important in the immune system. These substances cause blood vessels to widen, resulting in the irritated area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful. When clobetasol is applied to the skin it works by acting inside the skin cells to decrease the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces swelling, redness and itching. There is a range of potencies of corticosteroids applied to the skin. Clobetasol is a very potent corticosteroid that is applied to the skin to treat severe inflammatory skin disorders, such as psoriasis, that have not responded to milder steroids. Etrivex shampoo is used to treat psoriasis of the scalp. It should be applied thinly directly onto a dry scalp once daily, taking care to massage the shampoo into the affected areas of skin on the scalp. The shampoo should be left on for 15 minutes; the scalp must NOT be covered (eg with a shower cap) during this time. After 15 minutes the shampoo can be rinsed off with water, or the hair can be washed using your regular shampoo. Hair can then be dried as usual. The shampoo should not be used for longer than four weeks at a time. As soon as the condition starts to improve, you should use the shampoo less frequently, as directed by your doctor. If there is no improvement in your psoriasis after four weeks treatment you should consult your doctor. Repeat courses maybe necessary to control flare-ups of psoriasis, but should only be started on the advice of your doctor. You will need to have regular check-ups. Not to be used in Skin infected with viruses (eg cold sores, chickenpox, shingles), fungi (eg ringworm), bacteria (eg impetigo) or parasites. Ulcerated skin, such as weeping wounds on the scalp. This medicine should not be used on the eyelids. This medicine must not be used on children under two years of age. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. When used as directed only tiny amounts of this medicine are absorbed into the bloodstream. However, this medicine should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. Label warnings This medication is to be spread thinly and sparingly on the skin. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Skin discomfort. Acne. Inflammation of the hair follicles (folliculitis). Itching (pruritis). Thinning of the skin. Groupings of fine blood vessels becoming prominent under the skin (telangiectasia). Eye irritation such as stinging or burning. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. References: https://www.medicines.ie/medicines/etrivex-500-micrograms-g-shampoo-32075/ https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8694/etrivex-shampoo-clobetasol/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/350/smpc https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/LicenseSPC_PA0590-023-001_10102017092849.pdf http://www.hpra.ie/homepage/site-tools/etrivex &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis Print This Page Health Reference Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin