Exemestane, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Exemestane Tablets You are here: Home Exemestane Tablets Exemestane is a drug used to treat breast cancer in postmenopausal women (women who have gone through the menopause/change of life). It is a type of hormone treatment and is known as an aromatase inhibitor. Aromasin may be prescribed if your breast cancer comes back or progresses while you are taking tamoxifen. Why have I been prescribed Exemestane? Exemestane is a drug used to treat breast cancer in postmenopausal women (women who have gone through the menopause/change of life). It is a type of hormone treatment and is known as an aromatase inhibitor. Aromasin may be prescribed if your breast cancer comes back or progresses while you are taking tamoxifen. How does it work? Exemestane is most useful for breast cancers that rely on oestrogen for their growth (oestrogen receptor positive tumours) as it reduces the amount of oestrogen in the body. When and how do I take Exemestane? Exemestane comes as a tablet that you take once a day, preferably&nbsp;after a meal. It is best to take it at the same time each day. If you miss a dose you don’t need to take a replacement dose as the drug will remain in your system from the previous day. What’s the dose? 25mg once a day. Could they interact with other tablets? It is not advisable to take other drugs containing oestrogen, such as the contraceptive pill or HRT, while you are taking Exemestane. There do not seem to be any other drugs that interfere with Exemestane.&nbsp; Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? More common side effects: Nausea and vomiting which can sometimes be helped by taking your tablet with food Tiredness Menopausal symptoms such as hot flushes Less common side effects: Increased perspiration constipation increased appetite weight gain insomnia (sleeplessness) feeling low Rare side effects: Flu-like symptoms abdominal discomfort raised blood pressure breathlessness or coughing Can I drink alcohol while taking Exemestane? Do not consume any alcohol while undergoing treatment with Exemestane. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Exemestane cannot be taken if pregnant or breast feeding. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note:&nbsp; We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.steroid.com/Aromasin.php http://www.breastcancer.org/treatment/hormonal/aromatase_inhibitors/aromasin http://www.aromasin.com/ http://www.drugs.com/aromasin.html http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancers-in-general/treatment/cancer-drugs/exemestane http://chemocare.com/chemotherapy/drug-info/aromasin.aspx &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Breast Cancer Print This Page Health Reference Breast Cancer Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin