Betnovate Scalp Apllication, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betnovate Scalp Application You are here: Home Betnovate Scalp Application Betnovate scalp application is a strong and rapidly effective treatment for some scalp conditions such as psoriasis and dermatitis. Betnovate scalp application also contains an alcohol which has an antiseptic effect. Why have I been prescribed Betnovate Scalp Application? Betnovate scalp application is a strong and rapidly effective treatment for some scalp conditions such as psoriasis and dermatitis . Betnovate scalp application also contains an alcohol which has an antiseptic effect. How does it work? Betnovate scalp application is one of a group of medicines called topical steroids.&nbsp;”Topical“ means they are put on the skin. Topical steroids reduce the redness and itchiness of certain skin problems. (They should not be confused with ”anabolic” steroids misused by some body builders and taken as tablets or injections). When and how do I take it? When washing or shampooing your hair, apply the scalp application after drying your hair. Betnovate scalp application is inflammable so keep it away from fire and do not dry your hair near fire or a naked flame. If your doctor has told you in detail how to use the scalp application then keep to that advice otherwise: For adults: Morning and evening: Unscrew the cap on the bottle and place the nozzle on the part of the scalp that needs treating. Gently squeeze the bottle until the area to be treated is completely covered with a thin layer of liquid. You can gently rub it into the scalp if you wish. Your scalp will feel cool until the liquid has dried off. The active ingredient is then left on your scalp. As soon as the scalp problem looks better use once a day or less. For a child: It should not be used on children under one year of age. Never use more than is needed to cover the scalp condition. Do not use for a long-time (nearly every day for weeks or months). Do not cover with an airtight dressing. What’s the dose? See above. Could it interact with other tablets? There are no known interactions between Betnovate Scalp Application and other medicines. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Most people find this application causes no problems when used in the right amount for the correct length of time. (See above). If you find your condition gets worse during treatment you may be allergic to it or have a scalp infection or if you think the application is causing any side effects, STOP USING THE SCALP APPLICATION AND TELL YOUR DOCTOR AS SOON AS POSSIBLE Itching, a local burning sensation or reddening of the skin at the site where your scalp application was applied have been reported. It may even appear that your condition is getting worse, i.e. a postular form of the disease may occur. This is why your doctor may want to see you regularly. Using more than the correct amount may allow the active ingredient to pass through the scalp and affect other parts of the body, especially in infants and children. The use of airtight bandages or dressings over the treated areas increases the risk. If you feel unwell or have any unusual discomfort you do not understand, tell your doctor as soon as&nbsp;possible. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between Betnovate Scalp Application and alcohol. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or breast feeding. He/she will decide if you should use Betnovate Scalp Application. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topical_steroid http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2146776.PA1077_001_003.18383203-dc01-43d6-97c6-000de4fa4739.000001Betnovate%20PIL.140529.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a8401/betnovate-scalp-application-betamethasone/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/716/SPC/Betnovate+Scalp+Application/ http://www.drugs.com/uk/betnovate-scalp-application-spc-12163.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis , Dermatitis Print This Page More Videos... Eczema Health Reference Psoriasis Dermatitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin