Amoxil Capsules & Suspension | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Amoxil Capsules &amp; Suspension You are here: Home Amoxil Capsules &amp; Suspension Amoxil is a penicillin antibiotic. It fights bacteria in your body. Amoxil is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria, such as ear infections, bladder infections, pneumonia, gonorrhea, and E. coli or salmonella infection. What is Amoxil Amoxil is also sometimes used together with another&nbsp;antibiotic&nbsp;called&nbsp; clarithromycin &nbsp;(Klacid) to treat&nbsp; stomach ulcers &nbsp;caused by Helicobacter pylori infection. This combination is sometimes used with a stomach acid reducer called&nbsp; lansoprazole &nbsp;( Zoton ). Before taking Amoxil Do not use this medication if you are allergic to Amoxil or to any other penicillin&nbsp;antibiotic, such as: ampicillin dicloxacillin oxacillin penicillin How should I take Amoxil? Take Amoxil exactly as prescribed by your doctor. Do not take in larger or smaller amounts or for longer than recommended. Follow the directions on your prescription label. You may take Amoxil with or without food. Shake the oral suspension (liquid) well just before you measure a dose. Measure the liquid with a special dose-measuring spoon or medicine cup, not with a regular table spoon. If you do not have a dose-measuring device, ask your&nbsp;pharmacist&nbsp;for one. You may place the liquid directly on the tongue, or you may mix it with water, milk, baby formula, fruit juice, or ginger ale. Drink all of the mixture right away. Do not save any for later use. The chewable tablet should be chewed before you swallow it. Do not crush, chew, or break an extended-release tablet. Swallow it whole. Breaking the pill may cause too much of the drug to be released at one time. To be sure this medicine is helping your condition and is not causing harmful effects, your blood will need to be tested often. Your liver and kidney function may also need to be tested. Visit your doctor regularly. If you are being treated for gonorrhea, your doctor may also have you tested for&nbsp; syphilis , another sexually transmitted disease. If you are taking amoxicillin with&nbsp; clarithromycin &nbsp;and/or&nbsp; lansoprazole&nbsp; to treat&nbsp; stomach ulcer, &nbsp;use all of your medications as directed. Read the medication guide or patient instructions provided with each medication. Do not change your doses or medication schedule without your doctor's advice. Take Amoxil for the full prescribed length of time. Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared. Amoxil will not treat a viral infection such as the common cold or flu. Do not share this medication with another person, even if they have the same symptoms you have. Amoxil can cause unusual results with certain medical tests. Tell any doctor who treats you that you are using this medication. Store this medication at room temperature away from moisture, heat, and light. You may store liquid amoxicillin in a refrigerator but do not allow it to freeze. Throw away any liquid Amoxil that is not used within 14 days after it was mixed at the pharmacy. What happens if I miss a dose? Take the missed dose as soon as you remember. Skip the missed dose if it is almost time for your next scheduled dose. Do not take extra medicine to make up the missed dose. Amoxil side effects Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction to Amoxil: hives; difficulty&nbsp;breathing;&nbsp;swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Call your doctor at once if you have a serious side effect such as: white patches or sores inside your mouth or on your lips; fever, &nbsp;swollen glands, rash or itching, joint pain, or general ill feeling; severe blistering, peeling, and red skin rash; pale or yellowed skin, yellowing of the eyes, dark colored urine, fever, confusion or weakness; severe tingling, numbness, pain, muscle weakness; or easy bruising, unusual bleeding (nose, mouth, vagina, or rectum), purple or red pinpoint spots under your skin. Less serious Amoxil side effects may include: stomach pain, nausea, vomiting; vaginal itching or discharge; headache; or swollen, black, or "hairy" tongue. This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. For more information talk to your&nbsp;Pharmacist&nbsp;or Doctor. What other drugs will affect Amoxil? Tell your doctor about all other medicines you use, especially: probenecid; a blood thinner such as&nbsp; warfarin ; an&nbsp;antibiotic&nbsp;such as azithromycin (Zithromax),&nbsp; clarithromycin ,&nbsp; erythromycin &nbsp;(Erythrocin),&nbsp; sulfa drugs (Septrin and others); or a tetracycline antibiotic such as demeclocycline, &nbsp;doxycycline &nbsp;(Vibramycin), minocycline (Minocin), or tetracycline This list is not complete and other drugs may interact with Amoxil. Tell your doctor about all medications you use. This includes prescription, over-the-counter, vitamin, and herbal products. Do not start a new medication without telling your doctor. Amoxil side effects: Applies to Amoxil: for suspension oral, oral capsule, oral powder for reconstitution, oral tablet, oral tablet chewable, oral tablet extended release. Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction while taking Amoxil: hives difficulty breathing swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Call your doctor at once if you have a serious side effect such as: white patches or sores inside your mouth or on your lips fever , swollen glands, rash or itching, joint pain, or general ill feeling pale or yellowed skin, yellowing of the eyes, dark colored urine, fever, confusion or weakness severe tingling, numbness, pain, muscle weakness; easy bruising, unusual bleeding (nose, mouth, vagina, or rectum), purple or red pinpoint spots under your skin; or severe skin reaction -- fever, sore throat, swelling in your face or tongue, burning in your eyes, skin pain, followed by a red or purple skin rash that spreads (especially in the face or upper body) and causes blistering and peeling. Less serious side effects of Amoxil may include: stomach pain, nausea, vomiting; vaginal&nbsp; itching &nbsp;or discharge; headache ; or swollen, black, or "hairy" tongue. This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor or&nbsp;Pharmacist&nbsp;for medical advice about side effects. Storage and disposal of Amoxil: Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the capsules and tablets at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Throw away any medication that is outdated or no longer needed. The liquid medication preferably should be kept in the refrigerator, but it may be stored at room temperature. Throw away any unused medication after 14 days. Do not freeze. Talk to your pharmacist about the proper disposal of your medication. References: http://www.rxlist.com/amoxicillin-drug.htm http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amoxicillin http://www.drugs.com/drug-interactions/amoxicillin.html http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a685001.html http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/amoxicillin-for-infections http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/158481.php http://www.webmd.com/drugs/mono-3295-AMOXICILLIN+-+ORAL.aspx?drugid=1531&amp;drugname=amoxicillin+oral http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/drug-information/DR603565 Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Cough Treatment Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin