Depreger { Sertraline }, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Depreger - Sertraline You are here: Home Depreger - Sertraline Depreger (Sertraline) is a treatment for adults with depression and/or anxiety disorders. The anxiety disorders that ‘DEPREGER’ is used to treat are: obsessive compulsive disorder, panic disorder ,social anxiety disorder, post traumatic stress disorder and generalised anxiety disorder. Why have I been prescribed Depreger? Depreger&nbsp; ( Sertraline) can be used to treat: Depression and prevention of recurrence of depression (in adults). Social anxiety disorder (in adults). Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (in adults). Panic disorder (in adults). Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) (in adults and children and adolescents aged 6-17 years old). How does it work? Depreger contains an antidepressant drug called an SSRI. It increases the amount of a chemical (serotonin) in the brain which is known to be lowered in depression. When and how do I take it? Depreger tablets may be taken with or without food. Take your medication once daily either in the morning or evening. What’s the dose? Adults: Depression and Obssessive Compulsive Disorder: For depression and OCD, the usual effective dose is 50 mg/day. The daily dose may be&nbsp;increased in 50 mg increments and at intervals of at least one week over a period of weeks. The maximum recommended dose is 200 mg/day. Panic disorder, Social anxiety disorder and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder: For panic disorder, social anxiety disorder and post traumatic stress disorder, treatment should be started at 25 mg/day, and increased to 50 mg/day after one week. The daily dose then may be increased in 50 mg increments over a period of weeks. The&nbsp;maximum recommended dose is 200 mg/day. Children and adolescents: Depreger must only be used to treat children and adolescents suffering from OCD aged 6-17 years old. Obsessive Compulsive Disorder : Children aged 6 to 12: the recommended starting dose is 25 mg daily. After one week, your doctor may increase this to 50 mg daily. The maximum dose is 200 mg daily. Adolescents aged 13 to 17: the recommended starting dose is 50 mg daily. The maximum dose is 200 mg daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Taking&nbsp;Depreger&nbsp;to g ether with the following medicines may cause serious side effects: Medicines called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), like moclobemide (to treat&nbsp;depression) and selegiline (to treat Parkinson’s disease) and the antibiotic linezolid. Do not use Lustral together with MAOIs. Medicines to treat mental disorders (pimozide). Do not use Depreger together with pimozide. Talk to your doctor if you are taking the following medicine: Herbal medicine containing St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum). The effects of St. John’s Wort may last for 1-2 weeks. Talk to your doctor. Products containing the amino acid tryptophan. Medicines to treat severe pain (e.g. tramadol ). Medicines to treat migraines (e.g. sumatriptan). Blood thinning medicine ( warfarin ). Medicines to treat pain/arthritis (Non steroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) such as&nbsp; ibuprofen , acetylsalicylic acid ( aspirin ). Sedatives ( diazepam ). Diueretics. Medicines to treat epilepsy (phenytoin). Medicines to treat diabetes (tolbutamide). Medicines to treat excessive stomach acid and ulcers (cimetidine). Medicines to treat mania and depression (lithium). Other medicines to treat depression (such as amitriptyline, nortriptyline). Medicines to treat schizophrenia and other mental disorders (such as perphenazine,&nbsp;levomepromazine and olanzapine). What are the possible risks or side-effects? Nausea is the most common side effect. The side effects depend on the dose and are often transient with continued treatment. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms after taking this medicine, these symptoms can be serious. If you develop a severe skin rash that causes blistering (erythema multiforme), (this can affect the mouth and tongue). These may be signs of a condition known as Stevens Johnson Syndrome, or Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN). Your doctor will stop your treatment in these cases. Allergic reaction or allergy, which may include symptoms such as an itchy skin rash, breathing problems, wheezing, swollen eyelids, face or lips. If you experience agitation, confusion, diarrhoea , high temperature and blood pressure,&nbsp;excessive sweating and rapid heartbeat. These are symptoms of Serotonin Syndrome. In rare cases this syndrome may occur when you are taking certain medicines at the same time as sertraline. Your doctor may wish to stop your treatment. If you develop yellow skin and eyes which may mean liver damage. If you experience depressive symptoms with suicidal ideas . If you start to get feelings of restlessness and not be able to sit or stand still after you start to&nbsp;take Lustral. You should tell your doctor if you start to feel restless. The following side effects were seen in clinical trials in adults. Very common side effects (occurs in more than 1 out of 10 patients): Insomnia dizziness sleepiness headache diarrhoea feeling sick dry mouth ejaculation failure fatigue Common side effects (occurs in between 1 and 10 out of 100 patients): Sore throat anorexia increased appetite depression feeling strange nightmare anxiety agitation nervousness decreased sexual interest teeth grinding numbness and tingling shaking muscle tense abnormal taste lack of attention visual disturbance ringing in ears palpitations hot flush yawning abdominal pain vomiting constipation upset stomach gas rash increased sweating muscle pain sexual dysfunction erectile dysfunction chest pain Can I drink alcohol while taking it? You should avoid alcohol while taking Depreger. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Depreger cannot be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding. Women of child bearing potential should employ an adequate method of contraception if taking Depreger. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2121168.PPA1328_085_001.1ffec01a-dd92-4690-8890-c761e13d7252.000001PIL.131219.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/depression/a7045/lustral-sertraline/ http://patient.info/forums/discuss/i-have-been-on-lustral-for-a-year-i-felt-ghastly-at-fi--728 http://patient.info/medicine/sertraline-lustral https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sertraline https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/PIL.2362.latest.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Social anxiety disorder , Obsessive-compulsive disorder , Depression , Teen depression , Panic Attacks Print This Page Health Reference Social anxiety disorder Obsessive-compulsive disorder Depression Teen depression Panic Attacks Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin