Croup | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Croup You are here: Home Croup Croup is marked by a harsh, repetitive cough similar to the noise of a seal barking and can be scary for both children and their parents. After all, attacks of croup may jar your children awake at night and leave them gasping for breath. What is it? Croup, which is marked by a harsh, repetitive cough similar to the noise of a seal barking, can be scary for both children and their parents. After all, attacks of croup may jar your children awake at night and leave them gasping for breath. The harsh, barking cough of croup is the result of swelling around the vocal cords (larynx) and windpipe (trachea). When the cough reflex forces air through this narrowed passage, the vocal cords vibrate with a barking noise. Because children have small airways to begin with, those younger than age 5 are most susceptible to having more symptoms with croup. Croup usually isn't serious. In fact, for most cases, croup can be treated at home. Sometimes, your child will need prescription medication. Symptoms The classic sign of croup is a loud, harsh, barking cough — which often comes in bursts at night. Your child's breathing may be labored or noisy. Fever and a hoarse voice are common, too. Causes Croup is often caused by the parainfluenza virus. Less often, respiratory syncytial virus or various other respiratory viruses cause croup. Your child may contract a virus by breathing infected respiratory droplets coughed or sneezed into the air. Virus particles in these droplets may also survive on toys and other surfaces. If your child touches a contaminated surface and then touches his or her eyes, nose or mouth, an infection may follow. Rarely, croup may be caused by a bacterial infection. Risk factors Croup is most common in children age 5 and younger — particularly those who were born prematurely. Because of their smaller airways, signs and symptoms are typically most severe in children age 3 and younger. Complications Most cases of croup are mild. Rarely, the airway swells enough to interfere with breathing. Ear infection and pneumonia are other rare but potentially serious complications. Diagnosis Croup is typically diagnosed based on signs, symptoms and a physical exam. The doctor will observe your child's breathing, listen to your child's chest with a stethoscope and examine your child's throat. Sometimes X-rays or other tests are used to help make the diagnosis. Treatments and drugs In most cases, self-care measures at home — such as breathing moist air and drinking fluids — can speed your child's recovery. More aggressive treatment is rarely needed.&nbsp;If your child's symptoms persist or worsen, his or her doctor may prescribe corticosteroids, epinephrine or another medication to help open the airways. Antibiotics are effective only if your child has a bacterial infection. For severe croup, your child may need to spend time in a hospital receiving humidified oxygen.&nbsp; Croup can be scary — especially if it lands your child in the doctor's office, hospital or emergency room. Hold your child, sing lullabies or read quiet stories. Offer a favorite blanket or toy. Speak in a soothing voice. Your presence can help keep your child calm. Lifestyle and home remedies Croup often runs its course within three to seven days. In the meantime, keep your child comfortable with a few simple measures. Stay calm. Comfort or distract your child — cuddle, read a book or play a quiet game. Crying makes breathing more difficult. Moisten the air. Use a cool-air humidifier in your child's bedroom or have your child breathe the warm, moist air in a steamy bathroom. Although researchers have questioned the benefits of humidity as part of emergency treatment for croup, moist air seems to help children breathe easier — especially when croup is mild. Get cool. Sometimes breathing fresh, cool air helps. If it's cool outdoors, wrap your child in a blanket and walk outside for a few minutes. Hold your child in an upright position. Sitting upright can make breathing easier. Hold your child on your lap, or place your child in a favorite chair or infant seat. Offer fluids. For babies, water, breast milk or formula is fine. For older children, soup or frozen fruit pops may be soothing.Encourage resting. Sleep can help your child fight the infection. Try an over-the-counter pain reliever. If your child has a fever, paracetamol (Calpol) may help. Cough syrup, which doesn't affect the larynx or trachea, isn't likely to relieve your child's cough. Over-the-counter cold preparations are not recommended for children younger than age 12. Your child's cough may improve during the day, but don't be surprised if it returns at night. You may want to sleep near your child or even in the same room so that you can take quick action if your child's symptoms become severe. Prevention To prevent croup, take the same steps you use to prevent colds and flu. Frequent hand washing is most important. Also keep your child away from anyone who's sick, and encourage your child to cough or sneeze into his or her elbow.&nbsp;To stave off more-serious infections, keep your child's immunizations current. The diphtheria, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) and measles vaccines offer protection from some of the rarest — but most dangerous — forms of upper airway infection. Treatments and drugs In most cases, self-care measures at home — such as breathing moist air and drinking fluids — can speed your child's recovery. More aggressive treatment is rarely needed. If your child's symptoms persist or worsen, his or her doctor may prescribe corticosteroids, epinephrine or another medication to help open the airways. Antibiotics are effective only if your child has a bacterial infection. For severe croup, your child may need to spend time in a hospital receiving humidified oxygen. Rarely, a temporary breathing tube may need to be placed in a child's windpipe. Croup can be scary — especially if it lands your child in the doctor's office, hospital or emergency room. Hold your child, sing lullabies or read quiet stories. Offer a favorite blanket or toy. Speak in a soothing voice. Your presence can help keep your child calm. Lifestyle remedies Croup often runs its course within three to seven days. In the meantime, keep your child comfortable with a few simple measures. Stay calm. Comfort or distract your child — cuddle, read a book or play a quiet game. Crying makes breathing more difficult. Moisten the air. Use a cool-air humidifier in your child's bedroom or have your child breathe the warm, moist air in a steamy bathroom. Although researchers have questioned the benefits of humidity as part of emergency treatment for croup, moist air seems to help children breathe easier — especially when croup is mild. Get cool. Sometimes breathing fresh, cool air helps. If it's cool outdoors, wrap your child in a blanket and walk outside for a few minutes. Hold your child in an upright position. Sitting upright can make breathing easier. Hold your child on your lap, or place your child in a favorite chair or infant seat. Offer fluids. For babies, water, breast milk or formula is fine. For older children, soup or frozen fruit pops may be soothing. Encourage resting. Sleep can help your child fight the infection. Try an over-the-counter pain reliever. If your child has a fever, paracetamol may help. Cough syrup, which doesn't affect the larynx or trachea, isn't likely to relieve your child's cough. Over-the-counter cold preparations are not recommended for children younger than age 2. Your child's cough may improve during the day, but don't be surprised if it returns at night. You may want to sleep near your child or even in the same room so that you can take quick action if your child's symptoms become severe. Prevention To prevent croup, take the same steps you use to prevent colds and flu. Frequent hand washing is most important. Also keep your child away from anyone who's sick, and encourage your child to cough or sneeze into his or her elbow. To stave off more-serious infections, keep your child's immunizations current. The diphtheria, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) and measles vaccines offer protection from some of the rarest — but most dangerous — forms of upper airway infection. References: http://www.eumom.ie/baby/my-child-has-croup-what-should-i-do/ http://kidshealth.org/en/parents/croup.html https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/C/Croup/ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Croup &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... When to call the GP - For the Parents of Baby&#039;s Medicine Reference Calpol Sugar Free (OTC) Calpol Suspension (OTC) Nurofen for Children (OTC) Nurofen for Children Meltlets (OTC) Nurofen for Children Suppositories (OTC) Panadol (OTC) Paracetamol Paracetamol Paralink Suppositories 180mg (OTC) Calpol Suspension (OTC) Prednisolone Tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin