Vaginal yeast infection | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Vaginal yeast infection You are here: Home Vaginal yeast infection A vaginal yeast infection is a type of vaginitis — inflammation of the vagina — characterized by vaginal irritation, intense itchiness and vaginal discharge. A vaginal yeast infection affects your vagina and the tissues at the opening to your vagina (vulva). What is it? A vaginal yeast infection is a type of vaginitis — inflammation of the vagina — characterized by vaginal irritation, intense itchiness and vaginal discharge. A vaginal yeast infection affects your vagina and the tissues at the opening to your vagina (vulva). Vaginal yeast infection — also called candidiasis — is very common. As many as 3 out of 4 women experience a yeast infection at some point in their lifetimes. Many women experience two or more yeast infections. A vaginal yeast infection isn't considered a sexually transmitted disease, although the fungus that causes the condition can be spread through oral-genital contact. Treatment is usually effective, unless you have recurrent yeast infections — four or more in a single year. In that case, you may need a longer course of therapy and to follow a maintenance regimen. Symptoms Yeast infection symptoms range from mild to severe, including: Itching and irritation in the vagina and at that entrance to the vagina (vulva) A burning sensation, especially during intercourse or while urinating Redness and swelling of the vulva Vaginal pain and soreness Thick, white, odor-free vaginal discharge with a cottage cheese appearance Causes A vaginal yeast infection is caused by the fungus candida. Candida is a microorganism that's normally present in your vagina, along with bacteria. Your vagina naturally contains a balanced mix of yeast and bacteria. Lactobacillus bacteria produce acid, which discourages overgrowth of yeast in the vagina. But disruption of the healthy balance can result in an overgrowth of yeast. Too much yeast in your vagina can lead to vaginal itching, burning, and other classic signs and symptoms of a yeast infection. Overgrowth of yeast can result from: Antibiotic use, which leads to a decrease in the amount of lactobacillus bacteria in your vagina and a change in your vaginal pH that allows yeast to overgrow Pregnancy Uncontrolled diabetes Impaired immune system Anything that changes the type and amount of bacteria normally present in the vagina, such as douching or irritation from inadequate vaginal lubrication Most often, yeast infection results from a type of candida fungus known as Candida albicans. Sometimes, however, a different type of candida fungus might be the cause of symptoms. Candida albicans responds well to typical treatments for yeast infections. Other types of candida, however, sometimes respond poorly to conventional therapies and may require more aggressive treatment. A yeast infection can be sexually transmitted, especially through oral-genital sexual contact. However, yeast infection isn't considered a sexually transmitted disease because it happens in celibate women and the candida fungus is naturally present in the vagina. Risk factors Among the things that increase your risk of developing a yeast infection are: Antibiotic use . Yeast infections are common in women who take antibiotics. Broad-spectrum antibiotics kill healthy bacteria in your vagina, which can lead to the overgrowth of yeast. Increased estrogen levels . Yeast infections appear to occur more frequently in women with increased estrogen levels, for instance, in women who are pregnant, those taking high-dose estrogen birth control pills or those taking estrogen hormone therapy. Uncontrolled diabetes . In women who have diabetes, those with poorly controlled blood sugar levels are more likely to develop yeast infections than are women who have diabetes under control. Impaired immune system . In women who are immunocompromised — such as by corticosteroid therapy or by HIV infection — yeast infections are more likely to occur. Being sexually active . Although yeast infections aren't considered sexually transmitted diseases, one way the candida organism can be introduced into your vagina is through sexual contact. Diagnosis To diagnose a yeast infection, your doctor may: Ask questions about your medical history . This might include gathering information about any past vaginal infections or sexually transmitted diseases. Perform a pelvic exam . During the exam, you lie on your back on an exam table with your feet resting in supports called stirrups. Your doctor visually examines your external genitals for signs of infection. Next, your doctor places an instrument (speculum) into your vagina to hold the vaginal walls open so that he or she can examine the vagina and cervix. Your doctor may collect a sample of any vaginal discharge for examination under a microscope or to perform a vaginal culture test, if needed. After the speculum is removed, your doctor inserts gloved fingers into your vagina and, while using the other hand to press on your abdomen, examines your other pelvic organs for signs of disease. Send a sample of vaginal secretions for testing . For uncomplicated yeast infections, your doctor probably won't perform any sort of laboratory tests. However, if you have recurrent yeast infections, your doctor may be able to prescribe more effective treatment if he or she knows the specific type of yeast that's causing the infection. References http://www.medicinenet.com/yeast_infection_in_women_and_men/article.htm http://www.webmd.com/women/tc/vaginal-yeast-infections-topic-overview http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/yeast-infection/basics/causes/con-20035129 http://www.everydayhealth.com/yeast-infection/guide/treatment/ Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Suprax (Cefixime) Tablets Normix (Rifaximin) Tablets Medicine Reference Diflazole - (Fluconazole) Tablets/Suspension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin