Emadine, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Emadine Drops You are here: Home Emadine Drops Emadine eye drops contain the active ingredient emedastine, which is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine. What is it used for? Relieving the eye symptoms of hay fever (seasonal allergic conjunctivitis) in adults and children aged three years and older. How does it work? Emadine eye drops contain the active ingredient emedastine, which is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine. Histamine is a substance produced by the body as part of its defence mechanisms. It is stored in cells called mast cells, in almost all tissues of the body. When the body reacts to a foreign substance (known as an allergen, eg flower or grass pollen), the mast cells stimulated by the allergen release their stores of histamine. The released histamine then binds to its receptors (H-1 receptors), causing a chain reaction that results in allergic symptoms. It causes an increase in blood flow to the area of the allergy, and the release of other chemicals that add to the allergic response. All this results in the symptoms of an allergic reaction. In eye allergies such as hay fever, eg caused by flower pollen or grasses, histamine causes inflammation of the eyes, making them red, itchy and watery. Emedastine eye drops work by blocking the histamine receptors in the eyes. This stops it causing inflammation and thus provides relief from the symptoms of the eye allergy. How do I use it? Emadine eye drops contain the preservative benzalkonium chloride, which can be absorbed by soft contact lenses and cause eye irritation. For this reason if you wear soft contact lenses, you should remove them before putting in these eye drops. Wait at least 15 minutes before putting your lenses back in. However, if possible it is best not to wear your contact lenses at all while you are using these drops. Wash your hands before using the eye drops. Follow this link for instructions on how to use your eye drops. One drop should be put into each eye twice a day when needed to relieve symptoms. Use them for as long as your doctor recommends. If you forget to use the drops put the missed dose in as soon as you remember, unless it is almost time for your next dose. In this case you should just apply your next dose as usual and miss out the forgotten dose. Don't use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. Not to be used in Children under three years of age. The manufacturer states that these eye drops are not recommended for elderly people over 65 years of age, or people who have problems with their liver or kidney function, because they have not been studied in these groups of people. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine in pregnancy has not been established. It should be used with caution during pregnancy, and only if the benefits to the mother outweigh any risks to the developing baby. Seek further medical advice from your doctor before using these eye drops if you are pregnant. It is not known if this medicine passes into breast milk. It should be used with caution by women who are breastfeeding and only if the benefits to the mother outweigh any potential risks to the nursing infant. Seek medical advice from your doctor. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding and do use these eye drops (only on your doctor's advice), you can minimise the amount of medicine that is absorbed into your bloodstream by pressing on your tear duct while putting in the drops, and for a few minutes after. The tear duct is at the corner of the eye closest to your nose. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Eye pain. Eye itching or irritation. Dry eyes. Red eyes. Staining of the cornea. Blurred vision. Headache. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Sensation of something in the eyes. Watery eyes. Feeling of tired or strained eyes. Corneal infiltrates. Unusual taste. Rash. Abnormal dreams. Unknown frequency Increased heart rate (tachycardia). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? If you are using more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least five minutes apart, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. Use eye gels or ointments last. This medicine has not been reported to affect any other medicines. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emedastine https://www.drugs.com/cdi/emadine-drops.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eyes/a6653/emadine-eye-drops-emedastine/ http://www.rxlist.com/emadine-drug.htm http://patient.info/medicine/emedastine-eye-drops-for-hay-fever-emadine &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Conjunctivitis Print This Page Health Reference Conjunctivitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin