Diabrezide, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Diabrezide You are here: Home Diabrezide Diabrezide (Gliclazide) is a medicine that reduces blood sugar levels. It is used in type 2 diabetes when diet, exercise and weight loss are not enough to keep blood sugar levels controlled. Why have I been prescribed Diabrezide? Diabrezide (Gliclazide) is a medicine that reduces blood sugar levels. It is used in type 2 diabetes when diet, exercise and weight loss are not enough to keep blood sugar levels controlled. How does it work? Diabrezide reduces blood glucose levels by stimulating insulin secretion from the pancreas. When and how do I take it? Tablets should be swallowed whole as a single dose at breakfast . You must always eat a meal after taking your tablets. What’s the dose? Initial dose is half one tablet daily. This can be increased to a max of 4 tablets daily. Could they interact with other tablets? Diabrezide cannot be given with miconazole . Diabrezide may interact with the following drugs: Phenylbutazone Other antidiabetic agents (insulins, acarbose, biguanides) beta-blockers fluconazole angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (captopril, enalapril) H2-receptor antagonists MAOIs sulfonamides nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents Danazol Chlorpromazine Ritodrine salbutamol terbutaline glucocorticoids anticoagulants like warfarin Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Common side effects include: Hypoglycaemia (Low blood sugar levels) Treatment with Diabrezide MR 30 mg can cause hypoglycaemia , if mealtimes are irregular and, in particular, if meals are skipped. Possible symptoms of hypoglycaemia are: headache intense hunger nausea vomiting lassitude sleep disorders agitation aggression poor concentration reduced awareness and slowed reactions depression confusion visual and speech disorders aphasia tremor paresis sensory disorders dizziness feeling of powerlessness loss of self-control delirium convulsions shallow respiration bradycardia drowsiness and loss of consciousness, possibly resulting in coma and lethal outcome In addition, the following may be observed: sweating clammy skin anxiety racing heart hypertension palpitations angina pectoris cardiac arrhythmia Usually, symptoms disappear after intake of carbohydrates (sugar). However, artificial sweeteners have no effect. Hypoglycaemia can recur even when measures prove effective initially. If a hypoglycaemic episode is severe or prolonged, and even if it is temporarily controlled by intake of sugar, immediate medical treatment or even hospitalisation are required. Gastrointestinal disturbances, including abdominal pain, nausea, vomitingdyspepsia, diarrhoea, and constipation have been reported: if these should occur they can be avoided or minimised if gliclazide is taken with breakfast. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? You should not drink alcohol while taking Diabrezide. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? It is recommended that oral therapy is changed to insulin before a pregnancy is attempted, or as soon as pregnancy is discovered. Diabrezide cannot be given while breast feeding. If you have any further questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gliklazyd http://www.drugs.com/uk/diabrezide-leaflet.html http://www.fannin.eu/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/diabrezide-detail-aid-2012.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes - Type 2 Print This Page Health Reference Diabetes - Type 2 Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin