Accuretic tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Accuretic Tablets You are here: Home Accuretic Tablets Accuretic belongs to a group of medicines called angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and can be used to treat high blood pressure. Why have I been prescribed Accuretic? Accuretic (Quinalapril and Hydrochlorthiazide) is used to treat high blood pressure . How does it work? Quinapril belongs to a group of medicines called angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. ACE inhibitors work by widening blood vessels in the body, which can reduce the pressure in the vessels. Hydrochlorothiazide belongs to a group of medicines called diuretics. Diuretics help the body to get rid of extra fluid and are used in patients with high blood pressure . Because they get rid of fluid, diuretics are sometimes called 'water tablets'. When and how do I take it? Always take Accuretic exactly as your doctor has told you to. If you are not sure how to take your tablets ask your doctor or pharmacist. Never take more tablets than the doctor has told you to. Try to take the tablets at the same time(s) every day either with or without food. If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember unless it is time for your next dose. Do not take a double dose. If you accidentally take too many Accuretic tablets tell your doctor at once. If you can't do this, go to the nearest hospital accident and emergency department. Take along the medicine container even if there are not any tablets left, this helps the hospital staff tell what medicine you have taken. What’s the dose? Usually one a day Could it interact with other tablets? The following medicines may interact with Accuretic: allopurinol corticotropin insulin lithium procainamide tetracycline tubocurarine narcotics anaesthetics antacids antidiabetics antihypertensives barbiturates corticosteroids cytostatics diuretics immunosuppressant medicines non-steroidal anti-inflammatories potassium sparing medicines potassium supplements If you are taking Accuretic and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Side-effects which may occur are: Nausea , vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation, upset stomach or stomach pain. Headache, dizziness, flushing, insomnia (being unable to sleep) , feeling tired, drowsy or run down or generally feeling weak. Coughing, sneezing, runny nose or sore throat which may be signs of an upper respiratory tract infection. Bronchitis or viral infections. Pain in the back, chest or muscles. Skin rash, itch or increased sensitivity to sunlight. Severe skin rash associated with general illness. Pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), kidney disease (your doctor may carry out tests at times during your treatment if he thinks you may be at risk from kidney disease ). Hepatitis (inflammation of the liver) . Can I drink alcohol while taking it? This medicine may interact with alcohol You should seek advice from your prescriber as to whether you may drink alcohol while taking this medicine. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Accuretic cannot be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. &nbsp; References: Medicines.ie Website - Accuretic SPC http:// www.medicines.ie/medicine/6796/SPC/Accuretic+Tablets/ Medicines.ie Website- Accuretic PIL&nbsp; http://www.rxlist.com/accuretic-drug.htm http://www.drugs.com/mtm/accuretic.html Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin