Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Sabril Tablets Saflutan eye drops Sage Saizen (somatropin... Salactol Collodion Salamol inhaler -... Salazopyrin EN Salofalk Tablets/G... Sandostatin (octre... Sanomigran (pizoti... Saw Palmetto Scheriproct Ointme... Seebri breezhaler Selectol Tablets Selenium Senokot Septrin Paediatric... Septrin Tablets/Su... Serc (betahistine)... Serenace Tablets Seretide Diskus Seretide Evohaler Serevent Diskus Serevent Evohaler Seroquel - (Quetia... Seroxat Tablets -... Sertraline Tablets Sevredol (Morphine... Sibelium (Flunariz... Sildenafil Simator - Simvasta... Simcovas - Simvast... Simponi (golimumab... Simtan - Simvastat... Simvastatin Simzor - Simvastat... Sinemet /Sinemet P... Singulair Paediatr... Singulair Paediatr... Singulair Tablets Sivatin - Simvasta... Skinoren Cream Slow-K (potassium... Sofradex Eye/Ear d... Solaraze 3% Gel Solpadeine Soluble... Solpadeine Tablets... Solpadol 30mg/500m... Soolantra Cream Soprol - (Bisoprol... Sotacor Tablets Soy Spasmonal (alverin... Spiolto Respimat Spiriva HandiHaler... Spiriva Respimat Sporanox - (Itraco... St. John&#039;s Wo... Stalevo Tablets Starlix Tablets Stelara (ustekinum... Stem cell transpla... Stemetil Stiemycin Solution Stieprox Shampoo Stilnoct Tablets Stugeron Suplasyn Injection Suprax Suprax (cefixime)... Suprefact Injectio... Surmontil Capsules Suscard Buccal Tab... Symbicort Turbohal... Symmetrel Capsules Synjardy Tablets Medicine - S Sabril Tablets Sabril (Vigabatrin) is used to help control various forms of epilepsy. Sabril is used together with your current medication to treat “difficult to control” epilepsy. Sabril is also used to control infantile spasms (West’s syndrome). Saflutan eye drops Saflutan belongs to a group of medicines called prostaglandin analogues. It is used to lower raised pressure in the eye and to treat glaucoma. Glaucoma is a condition in which the pressure of fluid in the eye may be high.&nbsp; Sage Sage has long been suggested as a possible therapy for memory and cognitive improvement. Several trials provide evidence for the use of sage for this indication. Additional study is needed to confirm these findings and determine the best dose. Saizen (somatropin) Saizen is a prescription medicine that is used to treat growth hormone deficiency (GHD) in: Children with growth failure who produce low amounts of growth hormone. Adults with GHD that started as a child or as an adult. Saizen is an injectable form of a protein called growth hormone that is produced by your body. Salactol Collodion For the topical treatment of warts, verrucas, corns and calluses. Salamol inhaler - (Salbutamol) Salbutamol is a bronchodilator that relaxes muscles in the airways and increases air flow to the lungs. Salazopyrin EN Your doctor may give you Salazopyrin EN-tabs to treat and manage inflammatory bowel disease or to treat rheumatoid arthritis.(inflammation of the bowels) and may be used to treat proctitis (inflammation of the rectum). Salofalk Tablets/Granules/Enema Salofalk is used for the management of ulcerative colitis, and for the treatment of Crohn’s disease. Sandostatin (octreotide) Sandostatin is a hormone drug that is used to treat some types of cancer.&nbsp; Sandostatin is classified as an somatostatin analog.&nbsp; Sandostatin injection contains the active ingredient octreotide, which is a type of medicine called a somatostatin analogue. It is similar to a naturally-occurring hormone in the body called somatostatin. Somatostatin is produced in various parts of the body, including the brain, gut and pancreas. Its function is to stop the release of certain other hormones, such as growth hormone and insulin. Sanomigran (pizotifen) Sanomigran tablets contain the active ingredient pizotifen, which is a medicine used in the prevention of recurrent migraines and other vascular headaches. Pizotifen is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Saw Palmetto Saw palmetto has been widely tested, and the results show promise in the treatment of urinary symptoms caused by prostate problems. However, it is important to know that saw palmetto is recommended to treat symptoms associated with...... Scheriproct Ointment/Suppositories For the symptomatic relief of haemorrhoids and pruritus ani in the short term (5-7 days). Seebri breezhaler Seebri breezhaler contains the active ingredient glycopyrronium bromide, which is a type of medicine known as an antimuscarinic or anticholinergic bronchodilator. It works by opening the airways to make it easier to breathe. Selectol Tablets Selectol (Celiprolol) tablets are used in the management of mild to moderate hypertension and the management of angina pectoris Selenium Selenium is a trace mineral found in soil, water, and some foods. It is an essential element in several metabolic pathways. There is some evidence that low selenium levels are associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer. In...... Senokot This laxative is used to treat constipation. Septrin Paediatric Suspension Septrin Tablets works by killing the bacteria responsible for causing the infection. Like all antibiotics, those contained in co-trimoxazole only work against certain types of bacteria. This means that co-trimoxazole is only suitable for treating some types of infections. Septrin Tablets/Suspension Septrin Tablets works by killing the bacteria responsible for causing the infection. Like all antibiotics, those contained in co-trimoxazole only work against certain types of bacteria. This means that co-trimoxazole is only suitable for treating some types of infections. Serc (betahistine) Tablets Serc tablets contain the active ingredient betahistine, which is a medicine that closely resembles the natural substance histamine. Betahistine is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Betahistine is used to relieve the symptoms of Ménière's disease, which is a disorder of the inner ear. Serenace Tablets Haldol tablets, liquid and injection all contain the active ingredient haloperidol. Haloperidol is a type of medicine known as an antipsychotic. It is used in the treatment of various psychiatric illnesses. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin