Erythroped, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Erythroped (Erythromycin) Suspension You are here: Home Erythroped (Erythromycin) Suspension Erythroped (Erythromycin) Suspension&nbsp;contains the active ingredient erythromycin, which is a type of medicine known as a macrolide antibiotic. It is used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Erythroped is a brand name for the active ingredient erythromycin. What is Erythroped? Erythroped is a brand name for Erythromycin, which is part of a group of drugs called macrolide antibiotics. Macrolide antibiotics slow the growth of, or sometimes kill, sensitive bacteria by reducing the production of important proteins needed by the bacteria to survive. Erythroped is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria. How should I take Erythroped? Take Erythroped exactly as prescribed by your doctor. Do not take in larger or smaller amounts or for longer than recommended. Follow the directions on your prescription label. You may take Erythroped with or without food. Do not crush, chew, break, or open an erythrocin tablet or capsule. Swallow it whole. Shake the oral suspension (liquid) well just before you measure a dose. Measure the liquid with a special dose-measuring spoon or medicine cup, not with a regular table spoon. If you do not have a dose-measuring device, ask your pharmacist for one. This medication can cause unusual results with certain medical tests. Tell any doctor who treats you that you are using Erythroped. Take this medicine for the full prescribed length of time. Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared. Skipping doses may also increase your risk of further infection that is resistant to antibiotics. Erythroped will not treat a viral infection such as the common cold or flu . Store Erythroped at room temperature away from moisture and heat, unless otherwise directed on the medicine label. How does it work? Erythroped works by preventing bacteria from producing proteins that are essential to them. Without these proteins the bacteria cannot grow, replicate and increase in numbers. Erythroped doesn’t directly kill the bacteria, but leaves them unable to increase in numbers. The remaining bacteria eventually die or are destroyed by the immune system. This treats the infection. Erythroped is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is active against a wide variety of bacteria that cause a wide variety of infections. Erythroped may be used to treat infections of the upper or lower airways, skin or soft tissue, eyes or ears. It may also be used to treat certain sexually-transmitted infections , oral and dental infections, and to prevent infections in people who are at risk, for example due to surgery, trauma or burns. Erythroped is also used for treating inflammatory acne , as it is active against the bacteria associated with acne, Propionebacterium acnes. This is a common type of bacteria that feeds on sebum produced by the sebaceous glands in the skin. It produces waste products and fatty acids that irritate the sebaceous glands, making them inflamed and causing spots. By controlling bacterial numbers, erythrocin brings the inflammation of the sebaceous glands under control, and allows the skin to heal. (Other antibiotics may be preferred for acne however, as strains of the Propionebacterium that are resistant to erythrocin are becoming widespread.) To make sure the bacteria causing an infection are susceptible to erythrocin your doctor may take a tissue sample, for example a swab from the throat or skin. Erythroped has a similar range of antibacterial activity to penicillin and so is also useful as an alternative to penicillin in people who are allergic to penicillins. What is it used for? Bacterial infections of the lungs (chest or lower respiratory tract), eg bronchitis , bronchiectasis, pneumonia , Legionnaires' disease . Bacterial infection of the nasal passages, sinuses or throat (upper respiratory tract infection), eg sinusitis, pharyngitis, laryngitis , tonsillitis . Whooping cough . Bacterial infection of the middle ear (otitis media) or outer ear canal (otitis externa). Bacterial mouth infections, eg gum disease ( gingivitis ), Vincent's angina. Bacterial infection of the eyelids ( blepharitis ). Bacterial infections of the skin or soft tissue, eg boils , abscesses, cellulitis , impetigo , erysipelas. Acne . Chronic inflammatory disorder of the facial skin (acne rosacea ). Bacterial infections of the stomach and intestines. Inflammation of bone due to bacterial infection (osteomyelitis). Inflammation of the urethra due to bacterial infection (urethritis). Inflammation of the prostate gland due to bacterial infection (prostatitis). Gonorrhoea . Syphilis . Diphtheria. Scarlet fever . Prevention of bacterial infection following surgery, burns , trauma or dental procedures. What special precautions should I follow? Before taking Erythroped,&nbsp;tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to erythrocin, azithromycin (Zithromax), clarithromycin (Klacid), or any other drugs. tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially other antibiotics, anticoagulants ('blood thinners'), astemizole, carbamazepine ( Tegretol ), cisapride (Propulsid), clozapine, cyclosporine (Neoral), digoxin (Lanoxin), disopyramide, ergotamine, felodipine (Plendil), lovastatin, phenytoin, pimozide, terfenadine, theophylline, triazolam (Halcion), and vitamins. tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease, yellowing of the skin or eyes , colitis, or stomach problems. tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking erythrocin, call your doctor. if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking erythrocin. What side effects can Erythroped cause? Erythrocin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away: upset stomach diarrhoea vomiting stomach cramps mild skin rash stomach pain If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: severe skin rash itching hives difficulty breathing or swallowing wheezing yellowing of the skin or eyes dark urine pale stools unusual tiredness vaginal infection Before taking Erythroped Before taking Erythroped make sure your doctor or pharmacist knows: If you have liver or kidney problems. If it has been prescribed for a baby under 2 weeks old. If you suffer from the rare blood disorder called porphyria. If you are pregnant or breast-feeding. If you are taking other medicines, including those available to buy without a prescription, herbal or complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to this or any other medicine. How to take Erythroped Before beginning treatment, read the manufacturer's printed information leaflet. Take erythromycin exactly as directed by your doctor or dentist. You must take erythromycin at regular intervals and complete the course you have been given, even if you feel well. Swallow erythromycin tablets and capsules whole, with a glass of water. Do not chew them. It is not important whether you take erythromycin before or after meals. Try to take erythromycin at the same times each day to avoid missing any doses. If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember unless it is nearly time for your next dose, in which case leave out the missed dose. Do not take two doses together to make up for a missed dose. If you are taking erythromycin to treat acne or rosacea, it is quite normal for your treatment to continue for several weeks or months. How to store Erythroped Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. If you or your child have been given the suspension, this will have been made up by the pharmacy and have a limited shelf life. The expiry and storage conditions may vary between products. Check the expiry date on the bottle and do not use it after this date. Alcohol Alcohol can interact with certain medicines. In the case of Erythroped: There are no known interactions between alcohol and Erythroped. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erythromycin http://www.drugs.com/erythromycin.html http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682381.html http://www.rxlist.com/eryc-drug.htm http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/erythromycin http://www.webmd.com/drugs/drug-3959-Erythromycin+Oral.aspx?drugid=3959&amp;drugname=Erythromycin+Oral http://www.nhs.uk/medicine-guides/pages/MedicineOverview.aspx? condition=Bacterial%20infections&amp;medicine=erythromycin&amp;preparationErythromycin%20250mg%20gastro-resistant%20capsuleshttp://www.netdoctor.co.uk/sex-and-relationships/medicines/erythrocin.html Read More &gt; Health Reference : Pneumonia , Laryngitis , Tonsillitis , Gonorrhea , Cellulitis , Impetigo Print This Page Health Reference Pneumonia Laryngitis Tonsillitis Gonorrhea Cellulitis Impetigo Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin