Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Apidra SoloStar pens/cartridges You are here: Home Apidra SoloStar pens/cartridges Apidra SoloStar pre-filled pens and Apidra penfill cartridges, contain the active ingredient insulin glulisine. They are used to treat diabetes. What is it used for? Diabetes in adults and children aged six years and older. How does it work? Apidra SoloStar pre-filled pens and Apidra penfill cartridges, contain the active ingredient insulin glulisine. They are used to treat diabetes. People with diabetes have a deficiency or absence of a hormone manufactured by the pancreas called insulin. Insulin is the main hormone responsible for the control of sugar (glucose) in the blood. People with type one diabetes need to have injections of insulin to control the amount of glucose in their bloodstream. Insulin injections act as a replacement for natural insulin, and allow people with diabetes to achieve normal blood glucose levels. The insulin works in the same way as natural insulin, by binding to insulin receptors on cells in the body. Insulin causes cells in the liver, muscle and fat tissue to increase their uptake of glucose form the bloodstream. It also decreases the production of glucose by the liver, and has various other effects that lower the amount of glucose in the blood. Apidra contains a type of insulin called insulin glulisine. This is known as a fast-acting insulin. When it is injected under the skin it starts to lower blood sugar within approximately 10 to 20 minutes and its effects last for around three to four hours. This type of insulin should be injected up to 15 minutes before, or if necessary immediately after a meal, to control increasing blood glucose levels after eating. Insulin glulisine is usually given in combination with intermediate or longer-acting types of insulin, which provide control over blood glucose throughout the day. It is important to monitor your blood glucose regularly and adjust your insulin dose as required. Your doctor or diabetic team will explain how to do this. Keeping your blood glucose level as close to normal as possible, and not too high or too low, significantly reduces the risk of developing late-stage diabetic complications, such as problems with your nerves, eyesight or kidneys. How do I use it? Your doctor or diabetes specialist will teach you how to administer your insulin injections correctly. Make sure you understand what to do and ask questions if you don't. Apidra injections are given under the skin of the abdomen, thigh or upper arm. You should take care to ensure that the injection does not enter a blood vessel. The injection may start to start to work at different speeds depending on the site you use and various other factors, such as if you have been doing exercise. In general, injections into the abdomen start to work quicker than those given in other areas. You shouldn't massage the injection area after administering an injection. Each time you inject your insulin make sure you use a different site. This helps to prevent the skin thickening and pitting, which can occur if the injection is repeatedly given in the same site. You should measure your blood sugar levels every day when using insulin injections. The dose you need to inject each time will depend on your blood sugar levels, what you are going to eat and if you have been doing or will be doing exercise. Control of blood sugar is an individual process and your diabetes specialist will help you to understand what is required. Your insulin requirements may increase when you are ill, especially if you have an infection or fever. Your insulin dose may also need adjusting during periods of emotional disturbance, or if you increase your physical activity or change your usual diet. Insulin requirements may be reduced if you have impaired kidney or liver function. Discuss this with your doctor or diabetes nurse to make sure you optimise control of your blood sugar. Warning! Low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia) is a potential side effect of insulin therapy. Your diabetes team should give you instructions on how to avoid it. Symptoms of hypoglycaemia usually occur suddenly and may include cold sweats, cool pale skin, tremor, anxious feeling, unusual tiredness or weakness, confusion, difficulty in concentration, excessive hunger, temporary vision changes, headache, nausea and palpitations. You should make sure you know what to do if you experience these symptoms - ask your doctor or diabetes nurse for advice if you are unsure about anything. Your ability to concentrate or react may be reduced if you have low blood sugar, and this can cause problems driving or operating machinary. You should take precautions to avoid low blood sugar when driving - discuss this with your doctor. You should only change your insulin on your doctor's advice. If you do transfer to a different insulin, eg different type (short, intermediate or long acting), different species (human or animal), different brand, or different strength of insulin, your doctor may need to alter your dose, and your warning symptoms of low blood sugar may be slightly different. People with diabetes who are on insulin should only drink alcohol in moderation and accompanied by food. This is because alcohol can make your warning signs of low blood sugar less clear, and can cause delayed low blood sugar, even several hours after drinking. People with diabetes who smoke normally need more insulin, as smoking reduces the amount of insulin that is absorbed into the blood from an injection under the skin. If you give up smoking, you may subsequently need a reduction in your insulin dose. Discuss this with your doctor. (If you are diabetic giving up smoking is one of the most important things you can do, because it will vastly reduce your risk of complications like heart disease and circulatory problems.) Not to be used in Low blood sugar levels (hypoglycaemia). Apidra is not recommended for children under six years of age, as it has not been fully studied in this age group. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. Insulin glulisine has not been adequately studied in pregnant women and should be used with caution during pregnancy. However, studies in animals have not revealed any differences between insulin glulisine and human insulin with regards to pregnancy. Human insulin does not cross the placenta and provides no risk to the developing baby. Blood sugar levels need to be maintained as stable as possible during pregnancy, and you should consult your diabetic specialist to discuss how to acheive this. Your insulin requirements are likely to decrease in the first trimester and subsequently increase in the second and third trimesters. Discuss this with your doctor. It is not known if insulin glulisine passes into breast milk, but insulin in general does not. Even if it did, it would not affect a nursing infant, because insulin is not absorbed when taken by mouth. There is no risk to nursing infants from insulin taken by the mother. However, your insulin dose may need to be adjusted during breastfeeding. Discuss this with your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Very common (affect more than 1 in 10 people) Low blood glucose level (hypoglycaemia)&nbsp; Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Redness, swelling or itching at the injection site. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Allergic reaction (hypersensitivity), such as skin rash or itching, hives, chest tightness, shortness of breath or severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis. Rare (affect between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10,000 people) Skin thickening or pitting (lipodystrophy) if injection given too frequently into the same site. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? Insulin itself doesn't affect other medicines. However, it is important to be aware that many medicines can affect blood glucose levels and can therefore change your insulin requirements. For this reason, people with diabetes should always seek advice from their doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines or stopping existing ones. The following medicines may decrease blood sugar levels. If you start treatment with any of these your insulin dose may therefore need decreasing: ACE inhibitors, eg captopril (these can sometimes cause unpredictable drops in blood sugar) anabolic steroids, eg testosterone, nandrolone, stanozolol antidiabetic medicines taken by mouth disopyramide fibrates, eg gemfibrozil fluoxetine MAOI antidepressants, eg phenelzine octreotide large doses of salicylates, eg aspirin (small pain relieving doses do not normally have this effect). Beta-blockers, eg propranolol (including eye drops containing beta-blockers) can mask some of the signs of low blood sugar, such as increased heart rate and tremor. They also prolong episodes of low blood sugar and impair recovery back to normal glucose levels. The following medicines may increase blood glucose levels. If you start treatment with any of these your insulin dose may therefore need increasing: some antipsychotic medicines, eg chlorpromazine, olanzapine corticosteroids, eg hydrocortisone, prednisolone danazol diuretics, especially thiazide diuretics, eg bendroflumethiazide isoniazid lithium protease inhibitors, eg ritonavir somatropin (human growth hormone). Oestrogens and progestogens, such as those contained in oral contraceptives, may affect blood sugar levels, and women taking these may need small adjustments up or down in their insulin dose. How do I store Apidra? Pre-filled pens: Unused pre-filled pens should be stored in a refrigerator at 2-8°C. Do not freeze. Keep the pen in the outer carton to protect from light. Once in use, the pens should be kept out of the fridge, below 25°C. They can be used for up to 28 days. The pen cap must be put back on the pen after each injection in order to protect from light. The pens should not be stored with the needle attached and should not be kept in the fridge once in use. Cartridges: Before use, cartridges should be stored in a refrigerator at 2-8°C. Do not freeze. Keep the cartridges in the outer carton to protect from light. Once in use, the pen with the inserted cartridge should be kept out of the fridge, below 25°C. It can be used for up to 28 days. The pen cap must be put back on the pen after each injection in order to protect from light. The pen should not be stored with the needle attached. Make sure all medicines are kept out of the reach of children and avoid exposing them to excessive heat or direct sunlight. References: https://www.everydayhealth.com/drugs/lantus https://www.lantus.com https://www.lantus.com/using-lantus/using-the-solostar-pen https://www.drugs.com/lantus.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insulin_glargine http://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/diabetes-and-lantus.html http://www.rxlist.com/lantus-drug.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes , Diabetes - Hyperglycemia , Diabetes - Hypoglycemia , Diabetes - Type 1 , Diabetes - Type 1in Children , Diabetes - Type 2 , Diabetes - Type 2 in Children , Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you , Diabetic coma Print This Page More Videos... What is insulin and how does it work? What are the different types of insulin. Health Reference Diabetes Diabetes - Hyperglycemia Diabetes - Hypoglycemia Diabetes - Type 1 Diabetes - Type 1in Children Diabetes - Type 2 Diabetes - Type 2 in Children Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you Diabetic coma Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin