Ectopic pregnancy | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Ectopic pregnancy You are here: Home Ectopic pregnancy Pregnancy begins with a fertilized egg. Normally, the fertilized egg attaches itself to the lining of the uterus. With an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg implants somewhere else. What is it? Pregnancy begins with a fertilized egg. Normally, the fertilized egg attaches itself to the lining of the uterus. With an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg implants somewhere else. An ectopic pregnancy nearly always occurs in one of the tubes that carry eggs from the ovaries to the uterus (fallopian tubes). This type of ectopic pregnancy is known as a tubal pregnancy. Rarely, an ectopic pregnancy occurs in the abdomen, ovary or neck of the uterus (cervix). An ectopic pregnancy can't proceed normally. The fertilized egg can't survive, and the growing tissue may destroy various maternal structures. Left untreated, life-threatening blood loss is possible. Early treatment of an ectopic pregnancy can help preserve the chance for future healthy pregnancies. Symptoms In many cases, a woman with a developing ectopic pregnancy may not have any indication of being pregnant. Early signs and symptoms, if they occur, may be the same as those of any pregnancy — a missed period, breast tenderness, nausea and fatigue. If you suspect pregnancy and take a test, it will be positive. But an ectopic pregnancy can't continue as normal. The first warning signs of an ectopic pregnancy often include: Light vaginal bleeding Lower abdominal pain Cramping on one side of the pelvis If the fallopian tube ruptures, symptoms may include: Sharp, stabbing pain in the pelvis, abdomen, or even the shoulder and neck Dizziness Lightheadedness Causes An ectopic pregnancy happens when a fertilized egg gets stuck on its way to the uterus — often because the fallopian tube is scarred, damaged or misshapen. Sometimes, the specific cause of an ectopic pregnancy remains a mystery. Risk factors Up to an estimated 20 in every 1,000 pregnancies are ectopic. Various factors are associated with ectopic pregnancy, including: Previous ectopic pregnancy . If you've had one ectopic pregnancy, you're more likely to have another. Inflammation or infection . The majority of women with ectopic pregnancies have had inflammation of the fallopian tube (salpingitis) or an infection of the uterus, fallopian tubes or ovaries (pelvic inflammatory disease). Gonorrhea or chlamydia can cause tubal problems that increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy. A condition that causes the tissue that normally lines the uterus to develop outside the uterus (endometriosis) also may slightly increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy. Fertility problems . Taking medication to stimulate ovulation increases the risk of ectopic pregnancy. Structural problems . An ectopic pregnancy is more likely if you have an unusually shaped fallopian tube or the fallopian tube was damaged, possibly during surgery. Even surgery to reconstruct the fallopian tube can increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy. Contraceptive choice . With proper use, pregnancy is rare when using birth control pills or an intrauterine device (IUD). If pregnancy occurs, however, it's more likely to be ectopic. The same goes for pregnancy after tubal ligation, a permanent method of birth control commonly known as "having your tubes tied." Although pregnancy is rare after tubal ligation, if it happens it's more likely to be ectopic. Successful pregnancy after an ectopic pregnancy may still be possible. Even if one tube was injured or removed, an egg may be fertilized in the other fallopian tube before entering the uterus. If both tubes were injured or removed, in vitro fertilization may be an option. With this procedure, mature eggs are fertilized in the lab and then implanted into the uterus. Complications When you have an ectopic pregnancy, the stakes are high. Treatment may lead to loss of reproductive organs or infertility. Without treatment, the stakes are even higher. A ruptured fallopian tube may lead to life-threatening bleeding. Diagnosis If your health care provider suspects an ectopic pregnancy, he or she may do a pelvic exam to check for pain, tenderness, or a mass in the fallopian tube or ovary. A physical exam alone isn't enough to diagnose an ectopic pregnancy, however. The diagnosis is typically confirmed with blood tests and imaging studies, such as an ultrasound. With a standard ultrasound, high-frequency sound waves are directed at the tissues in the abdominal area. During early pregnancy, however, the uterus and fallopian tubes are closer to the vagina than to the abdominal surface. The ultrasound will likely be done through a wand-like device placed in your vagina. Sometimes it's too soon to detect a pregnancy through ultrasound. If the diagnosis is in question, your health care provider may monitor your condition with blood tests until the ectopic pregnancy can be confirmed or ruled out through ultrasound — usually by four to five weeks after conception. In an emergency situation — if you're bleeding heavily, for example — an ectopic pregnancy may be diagnosed and treated surgically. Treatments and drugs A fertilized egg can't develop normally outside the uterus. To prevent life-threatening complications, the ectopic tissue must be removed. Sometimes if the ectopic pregnancy is detected early, an injection of the drug methotrexate may be used to stop cell growth and dissolve existing cells. After the injection, your health care provider will monitor your blood for the pregnancy hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). If the HCG level remains high, you may need another injection of methotrexate. If the ectopic pregnancy doesn't respond to medication or is too large, or you're unable to use methotrexate or return for monitoring, you may need laparoscopic surgery. In this procedure, the doctor makes a small incision in the abdomen, near or in the navel. Then he or she uses a thin tube equipped with a camera lens and light (laparoscope) to view the area. Other instruments can be inserted into the tube or through other small incisions to remove the ectopic tissue and repair the fallopian tube. If the fallopian tube is significantly damaged, it may need to be removed. If the ectopic pregnancy is causing heavy bleeding or the fallopian tube has ruptured, you may need emergency surgery through an abdominal incision (laparotomy). In some cases, the fallopian tube can be repaired. Typically, however, the ruptured tube must be removed. In a few cases, an injection of methotrexate is needed after surgery. Prevention You can't prevent an ectopic pregnancy, but you can decrease certain risk factors. For example, limit your number of sexual partners and use a condom when you have sex to help prevent sexually transmitted diseases and reduce the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease. If you've had an ectopic pregnancy, talk to your health care provider before conceiving again. When you become pregnant, your health care provider will carefully monitor your condition. Coping and support Losing a pregnancy is devastating, even if you've only known about it for a few days. Recognize the loss, and give yourself time to grieve. Talk about your feelings and allow yourself to experience them fully. Rely on your partner, family and friends for support. Many women who have ectopic pregnancies go on to have other, healthy pregnancies. If you choose to conceive again, seek your health care provider's advice. Early ultrasound imaging can offer reassurance that the pregnancy is developing normally. References: http://americanpregnancy.org/pregnancy-complications/ectopic-pregnancy/ http://ectopicireland.ie/medical-info/ http://www.medicinenet.com/ectopic_pregnancy/article.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ectopic_pregnancy http://www.prolifeinfo.ie/women/medical-matters/ectopic-pregnancy/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin