Atacand Plus, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Atacand Plus You are here: Home Atacand Plus The name of your medicine is Atacand Plus. It is used for treating high blood pressure (hypertension). It contains two active ingredients: candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide. These work together to lower your blood pressure. Why have I been prescribed Atacand Plus? The name of your medicine is Atacand Plus. It is used for treating high blood pressure ( hypertension ). It contains two active ingredients: candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide. These work together to lower your blood pressure. How does it work? Candesartan cilexetil belongs to a group of medicines called angiotensin II receptor&nbsp;antagonists. It makes your blood vessels relax and widen. This helps to lower your blood&nbsp;pressure. Hydrochlorothiazide belongs to a group of medicines called diuretics (water tablets). It&nbsp;helps your body to get rid of water and salts like sodium in your urine. This helps to lower your blood pressure. Your doctor may prescribe Atacand Plus if your blood pressure has not been properly controlled by candesartan cilexetil or hydrochlorothiazide alone. When and how do I take it? Always take Atacand Plus exactly as your doctor has told you. You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. It is important to keep taking Atacand Plus every day. Swallow the tablet with a drink of water. Try to take the tablet at the same time each day. This will help you to remember to take it. What’s the dose? The usual dose of Atacand Plus is one tablet once a day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, or have recently used, any other&nbsp;medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Atacand Plus can affect&nbsp;the way some other medicines work and some medicines can have an effect on Atacand Plus. If you are using certain medicines, your doctor may need to do blood tests from time to time. In particular, tell your doctor if you are using any of the following medicines: Other medicines to help lower your blood&nbsp;pressure, including beta-blockers, diazoxide and ACE inhibitors such as enalapril, captopril, lisinopril or ramipril. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen , naproxen or diclofenac. COX-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib or etoricoxib. Acetylsalicylic acid, if you are taking more than 3g each day. Potassium supplements or salt substitutes containing potassium. Calcium or vitamin D supplements. Medicines to lower your cholesterol, such as colestipol or cholestyramine. Medicines for diabetes (tablets or insulin). Medicines to control your heart beat (antiarrhythmic agents) such as digoxin and beta-blockers. Heparin (a medicine for thinning the blood). Water tablets (diuretics). Laxatives. Penicillin (an antibiotic). Amphotericin (for the treatment of fungal infections). Lithium (a medicine for mental health problems). Steroids such as prednisolone. Pituitary hormone (ACTH). Medicines to treat cancer . Amantadine (for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease or for serious infections caused by viruses). Barbiturates (a type of sedative also used to treat epilepsy ). Carbenoxolone (for treatment of oesophageal disease, or oral ulcers). Anticholinergic agents such as atropine and biperiden. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Atacand Plus can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. It is important that you are aware of what these side effects may be. They are usually mild and disappear after a short time. Some of the side effects of Atacand Plus are caused by candesartan cilexetil and some are caused by hydrochlorothiazide. Stop taking Atacand Plus and seek medical help immediately if you have any of the following allergic reactions: Difficulties in breathing, with or without swelling of the face, lips, tongue and/or throat. Swelling of the face, lips, tongue and/or throat, which may cause difficulties in swallowing. Severe itching of the skin (with raised lumps). Atacand Plus may cause a reduction in number of white blood cells. Your resistance to&nbsp;infection may be decreased and you may notice tiredness, an infection or a fever. If this happens tell your doctor. Your doctor may occasionally do blood tests to check whether Atacand Plus has had any effect on your blood (agranulocytosis). Other possible side effects include: Common (affects less than 1 in 10 patients) : Changes in blood test results: A reduced amount of sodium in your blood. If this is severe then you may notice weakness, lack of energy, or muscle cramps . An increased or reduced amount of potassium in your blood, especially if you already have kidney problems or heart failure . If this is severe you may notice tiredness, weakness, irregular heart beat or pins and needles. An increased amount of cholesterol, sugar, or uric acid in your blood. Sugar in your urine. Feeling dizzy /spinning sensation or weak. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? If you drink alcohol, talk to your doctor beforetaking Atacand Plus. Some people who drink alcohol while taking Atacand Plus may feel faint or dizzy. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Before taking Atacand Plus, tell your doctor if you are pregnant or trying to become pregnant, or if you are breast-feeding. This is because Atacand Plus can affect your baby. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candesartan http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2131394.PPA0465_117_001.d59f3059-e468-4fbc-b698-0bf57d4e68ea.000001leaflet.130523.pdf http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Atacand-Plus.aspx http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human/referrals/Atacand_Plus/human_referral_000232.jsp&amp;murl=menus/regulations/regulations.jsp&amp;mid=WC0b01ac0580024e99 http://www.myvmc.com/drugs/atacand-plus-1612-5/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin