Lazy eye | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Lazy eye You are here: Home Lazy eye The brain and eyes have to work together to produce clear vision. If the brain favors one eye — usually due to poor vision in the other eye — the weaker eye tends to wander inward or outward. What is it? The brain and eyes have to work together to produce clear vision. If the brain favours one eye — usually due to poor vision in the other eye — the weaker eye tends to wander inward or outward. Eventually, the brain may ignore the signals received from the weaker eye. This condition is sometimes referred to as lazy eye (amblyopia). Lazy eye is the leading cause of decreased vision among children. And lazy eye is fairly common, affecting about two to three of every 100 children, according to the National Eye Institute. Conservative treatments such as corrective eyewear or eye patches can usually correct lazy eye. Sometimes, lazy eye requires surgical treatment. Left untreated, lazy eye may lead to permanent vision impairment. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of lazy eye include: An eye that wanders inward or outward Eyes that may not appear to work together Poor depth perception Although lazy eye usually affects just one eye, it's possible for both eyes to be affected. Causes Anything that blurs a child's vision or causes the eyes to cross or turn out may cause lazy eye. The most common culprit is strabismus — an imbalance in the muscles responsible for positioning of the eyes, which can cause the eyes to cross in or turn out. The muscle imbalance prevents the eyes from tracking with each other. Sometimes lazy eye is the result of an anatomic or structural abnormality, such as an abnormal central retina or a cloudy area in the lens of the eye (cataract). In other cases, an abnormal eye shape or a size difference between the eyes contributes to lazy eye. Risk factors Lazy eye tends to run in families. Lazy eye may be more likely among children who were born prematurely or those who have developmental delays as they get older. Occasionally, a wandering eye is the first sign of an eye tumour. Complications Left untreated, lazy eye can cause permanent vision loss. In fact, lazy eye is the most common cause of single-eye vision impairment in young and middle-aged adults, according to the National Eye Institute. Diagnosis Lazy eye is diagnosed with a thorough eye exam. The doctor will look for a wandering eye, as well as a difference in vision between the eyes or poor vision in both eyes. Special diagnostic tests aren't usually needed. References http://www.webmd.com/eye-health/amblyopia-child-eyes http://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/A/Amblyopia-lazy-eye-/Treating-lazy-eye.html http://www.aapos.org/terms/conditions/21 http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Lazy-eye/Pages/Treatment.aspx Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Eye Complaints Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin