Calcichew D3 Forte, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Calcichew D3 Forte tablets You are here: Home Calcichew D3 Forte tablets Calcichew D3 Forte (Calcium Carbonate) may be prescribed by doctors or recommended by pharmacists to treat and prevent calcium deficiency, or when the diet or lifestyle does not provide enough, or when body requirements are increased. Why have I been prescribed Calcichew D3 Forte? Calcichew D3 Forte (Calcium Carbonate) may be prescribed by doctors or recommended by pharmacists to treat and prevent calcium deficiency, or when the diet or lifestyle does not provide enough, or when body requirements are increased. This medicine may also be prescribed or recommended for certain bone conditions, for example osteoporosis , or in pregnancy. It may also be given to patients receiving renal dialysis to remove the phosphate from food that cannot be removed by dialysis. How does it work? Calcium (1250g calcium carbonate: equivalent to 500mg calcium) Vitamin D3 (400IU colecalciferol: equivalent to 10 micrograms Vitamin D3) It simply replaces the calcium lost in the body. The vitamin D3 makes it easier for the body to use the calcium. When and how do I take it? Calcichew D3 Forte tablets should be chewed or sucked . The tablets should be taken just before, during or just after each meal to make sure that the calcium binds to the phosphate in the stomach. Calcichew D3 Forte should not be taken within 2 hours of eating foods rich in oxalic acid (found in spinach and rhubarb) or phytic acid (found in whole cereals). What’s the dose? Adults and elderly: Chew or suck the two tablets a day, preferably one tablet in the morning and one in the evening. Children: Calcichew D3 Forte- D3 Forte Chewable Tablets are not recommended for use in children. Could it interact with other tablets? Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. In particular, the following medicines may interact with Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg tablets: diuretics (water tablets); your calcium levels should be monitored regularly. heart medicines (cardiac glycosides); you should be monitored by electrocardiogram and your serum calcium levels measured. corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone, dexamethasone); your dose of Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg may need to be increased tetracycline antibiotics; these should be taken at least two hours before, or four to six hours afterwards. fluoride, or bisphosphonates; Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg should be taken at least three hours afterwards. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Side effects with Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg may include: Uncommon side effects (affecting less than 1 in 100 people): too much calcium in your blood (hypercalcaemia) – the symptoms include nausea, vomiting, lack of appetite, constipation, stomach ache, bone pain, extreme thirst, a need to pass more water than usual, muscle weakness, drowsiness and confusion. too much calcium in your urine (hypercalciuria) Rare side effects (affecting less than 1 in 1000 people): nausea stomach ache constipation diarrhoea wind (flatulence) rash hives itching If you are taking Calcichew D3 Forte 500mg Chewable Tablets because you are having kidney dialysis, tell your doctor if you notice any white deposits on your skin. If any of these side-effects become serious, or if you notice any side-effect(s) not listed in this leaflet, please talk to your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There is no known interaction between Calcichew D3 Forte and alcohol. Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Calcichew D3 Forte can be used in calcium deficiency during pregnancy and while breast feeding, but calcium intake including that from diet should not exceed 1500mg and 600 IU colecalciferol. Significant amounts of calcium and Vitamin D are secreted in milk during lactation. This should be taken into consideration when considering giving your child Vitamin D supplementation. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.hyperdrug.co.uk/Calcichew-D3-Forte-Chewable-Tablets-pack-of-100/productinfo/CALCID31/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/28509 http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/diet-and-nutrition/a6352/calcichew-d3-forte-calcium-carbonate-colecalciferol/ http://www.drugs.com/uk/calcichew-d3-forte-chewable-tablets-spc-1343.html http://www.irishosteoporosis.ie/?/news/article/importance_of_calcium_and_vitamin_d/ https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2156591.PA1547_007_004.c5098e93-2ca3-48ec-b4d6-e8c7ab4339cf.000001ProductLeaflet1000.150513.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin