Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Ibugel Gel (Ibupro... Ibuprofen - (Nurof... Ideos Tablets Ikervis Eye Drop Ikorel Tablets Imdur Tablets Imigran Tablets/Na... Imipramine Imodium Capsules Implanon Implantable cardio... Imuran Tablets Incruse Ellipta Inderal Inegy Tablets Infliximab Innohep (Tinzapari... Innovace Inovelon Tablets Inspra Tablets Insulatard Insulin: What are... Insulin: What is i... Ireven Capsules -... Isoniazid Isoptin SR Tablets Isosorbide-mononit... Isotretinoin Table... Isotrexin Gel Istin Tablets - (A... Ixprim Tablets Medicine - I Ibugel Gel (Ibuprofen Gel) For the topical treatment of backache, rheumatic and muscular pain, sprains, strains and neuralgia. Ibugel is also indicated for symptomatic relief of pain due to non-serious arthritic conditions. Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Ibuprofen helps to reduce inflammation and to reduce pain. Ibuprofen can take a few weeks to help improve inflammation but can start to relieve pain after the first few doses. Ideos Tablets Ideos (Calcium Carbonate) may be prescribed by doctors or recommended by pharmacists to treat and prevent calcium deficiency, or when the diet or lifestyle does not provide enough, or when body requirements are increased. Also used in osteoporosis. Ikervis Eye Drop Ikervis contains the active ingredient, ciclosporin. Ciclosporin belongs to a group of medicines known as immunosuppressive agents that are used to reduce inflammation. &nbsp; Ikorel Tablets The name of your medicine is Ikorel Tablets (called Ikorel in this leaflet). Ikorel contains a medicine called nicorandil. Ikorel is used to stop and treat long-term chest pain (angina). Imdur Tablets Imdur (isosorbide-mononitrate) is used in the prevention and management of angina pectoris. Imdur is not indicated in the management of acute attacks of angina pectoris. Imigran Tablets/Nasal Spray Imigran tablets and Imigran Radis tablets both contain the active ingredient sumatriptan, which is a type of medicine called a serotonin (or 5HT) agonist. This type of medicine is also commonly known as a 'triptan'. It is a painkiller specifically used to relieve migraine attacks. Imipramine Imipramine is used: to treat the symptoms of depression. for the relief of bed-wetting at night by children. Imodium Capsules Imodium (Loperamide) is used to treat sudden, shortlived (acute) attacks of diarrhoea in adults and children 4 years and over and long-lasting (chronic) diarrhoea in adults. It works by making the stools more solid and less frequent. Implanon An implant is a small rod – about the length of a match, but more flexible. It's inserted under the skin of your upper arm, and it releases a hormone that keeps you from getting pregnant. You should be able to feel it with your fingertip, lying just below the surface of your skin. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) — a pager-sized device which is implanted in your chest — may reduce your risk of dying if your heart goes into a dangerous rhythm and stops beating (cardiac arrest). Imuran Tablets Imuran tablets contain a medicine called azathioprine. This medicine reduces the activity of your body’s immune system. Imuran is used to: stop your body rejecting an organ transplant treat diseases where your immune system reacts Incruse Ellipta Incruse ellipta inhaler contains the active ingredient umeclidinium, which is a type of medicine known as an antimuscarinic or anticholinergic bronchodilator. It works by opening the airways to make it easier to breathe. Inderal Inderal (Propranolol) is used for many conditions including: • Hypertension • Angina • Arrhythmias • Protecting the heart after a heart attack. • Preventing migraines. • Essential tremor • Anxiety • Thyroid Problems Inegy Tablets Inegy tablets contain two active ingredients, simvastatin and ezetimibe. Both these medicines are used to lower cholesterol. They work in different and complementary ways. Infliximab Infliximab is used in adults for the following infl ammatory diseases: Rheumatoid arthritis, Psoriatic arthritis, Ankylosing spondylitis, Psoriasis, Ulcerative colitis. Infliximab is also used in adults and children 6 years of age or older for: Crohn’s disease. Innohep (Tinzaparin) Innohep (Tinzaparin) belongs to a group of medicines called low molecular weight heparins which help to stop the blood from clotting. Innohep is used to treat blood clots in blood vessels, for example clots in the veins of the leg and clots in the blood vessels of the lung. Innovace Your doctor has probably prescribed Innovace (Enalapril) for you for one of the following reasons: • Your blood pressure is too high • You have heart failure • You have a damaged heart muscle Inovelon Tablets Inovelon is a medicine containing the active substance rufinamide. It is available as tablets (100 mg, 200 mg or 400 mg) and as an oral suspension (40 mg/ml). Inspra Tablets Inspra tablets contain the active ingredient eplerenone, which is a type of medicine called an aldosterone antagonist. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin