Daktacort, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Daktacort Cream You are here: Home Daktacort Cream Daktacort hydrocortisone cream contains two active ingredients, an antifungal called miconazole and a steroid called hydrocortisone. What is Daktacort cream used for? Inflamed athlete's foot (tinea pedis). Infection and inflammation between folds of skin, eg between the buttocks or thighs, or beneath the breasts, due to overgrowth of Candida fungi&nbsp; in these warm, moist areas (Candidal intertrigo, sometimes known as sweat rash). Daktacort hydrocortisone cream is recommended for these infections when you also want rapid relief from the symptoms of inflammation, eg itching. The miconazole treats the infection, while the hydrocortisone reduces the associated redness and itching. If you have a fungal infection without any symptoms of inflammation, an antifungal medication without hydrocortisone may be more appropriate for you. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you are in doubt. Daktacort hydrocortisone cream should not be used to treat children under 10 years of age, unless prescribed by a doctor. How does Daktacort cream work? Daktacort hydrocortisone cream contains two active ingredients, miconazole and hydrocortisone. Miconazole kills fungi, yeasts and some bacteria (Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species). Miconazole&nbsp; works by causing holes to appear in fungal cell membranes. This allows essential constituents of the fungal cells to leak out, which kills the fungi and clears up the infection. Hydrocortisone reduces inflammation in the skin by stopping skin cells from producing inflammatory substances such as prostaglandins. These are normally released when the skin reacts to irritation or infection. They cause blood vessels to widen and other inflammatory substances to arrive, making the affected area of skin become red, swollen and itchy. By preventing them being released in the skin, hydrocortisone reduces inflammation and relieves redness and itchiness. When the initial inflammation has cleared up, treatment of the infection should be continued with a medicine containing just an antifungal. How do I use Daktacort cream? Wash and dry the affected areas of skin thoroughly before applying the cream. For adults and children aged 10 years and over, Daktacort hydrocortisone cream should be applied thinly and evenly to the affected areas of skin and rubbed in gently twice a day. Wash your hands after applying the cream to avoid spreading the infection to other areas of the body, or to other people. The cream can be used for a maximum of seven days. If the infection is still present after this time, treatment should be continued with steroid-free Daktarin cream or Daktarin powder. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice. What should I know before using Daktacort cream? This cream is for external use on the affected area(s) of skin only. Do not apply Daktacort cream to broken areas of skin. The cream should not be used to treat large areas of skin. Do not apply Daktacort cream to the face, and avoid getting it in contact with your eyes, mouth and nose. The treated area(s) of skin should not be covered with airtight dressings, as this will increase the absorption of hydrocortisone into the body, which could increase the risk of local side effects such as skin thinning (see below). You should only use airtight dressings over the affected area if instructed to by your doctor. Daktacort cream should not be used to treat anal or genital areas, unless prescribed by a doctor. Daktacort cream should not be used on areas of skin affected by Viral skin infections such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores or genital herpes. Acne. Ringworm (tinea corporis) infections, unless prescribed by a doctor. Other skin infections, unless prescribed by a doctor. Daktacort hydrocortisone cream should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using Daktacort hydrocortisone cream and inform your doctor or pharmacist. Can I use Daktacort cream while pregnant or breastfeeding? Daktacort hydrocortisone cream should not be used during pregnancy unless prescribed by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. Daktacort hydrocortisone cream should not be used during breastfeeding unless prescribed by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings or for prolonged periods of time. If it is applied to the breasts it should be washed off carefully before breastfeeding and then reapplied afterwards. What are the possible side effects of Daktacort cream? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with Daktacort hydrocortisone cream. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Irritation in area of use, for example burning, stinging, itching, redness, rash. Stop using the cream and consult your doctor or pharmacist if you have a severe reaction to it. Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more&nbsp;information about the possible side effects of Daktacort hydrocortisone cream.&nbsp; Can I use Daktacort hydrocortisone cream with other medicines? Hydrocortisone and miconazole are unlikely to be absorbed through the skin in sufficient amounts to affect other medicines that you are taking by mouth. However, if you are taking warfarin to prevent blood clots, there is a very small chance that miconazole applied to the skin may enhance the effect of the warfarin. If you are taking warfarin your doctor may want to monitor your blood-clotting time (INR) during and after a course of this medicine. If you are using other topical medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave about 30 minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing or diluting on the skin. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a8325/daktacort-hydrocortisone-cream-miconazole-hydrocortisone/ http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Daktarin-Cream.aspx http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/1952/SPC/Daktarin+2++w+w+Cream/ https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2166546.PA0823_059_001.e7f468f0-d44d-4c6f-8bc5-9273dffadc86.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved%20Cream.151029.pdf &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Nappy Rash Print This Page Health Reference Nappy Rash Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin