Mild cognitive impairment | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Mild cognitive impairment You are here: Home Mild cognitive impairment Mild cognitive impairment is a transition stage between the cognitive decline of normal aging and the more serious problems caused by Alzheimer&#039;s disease. What is it? Mild cognitive impairment is a transition stage between the cognitive decline of normal aging and the more serious problems caused by Alzheimer's disease . The disorder can affect many areas of thought and action — such as language, attention, reasoning, judgment, reading and writing. However, the most common variety of mild cognitive impairment causes memory problems. Mild cognitive impairment affects about 20 percent of the population over 70. Many people with mild cognitive impairment eventually develop Alzheimer's disease, although some remain stable and others even return to normal. Symptoms The forgetfulness of normal aging is minor. You misplace your car keys or lose your car in the parking garage. Perhaps you can't remember the name of a former co-worker when you meet unexpectedly at the grocery store. This is nothing to worry about. But red flags should go up if you start forgetting things you typically remember, such as doctor's appointments or your weekly pinochle game. This happens to everyone now and then, but if a pattern develops, it could be a symptom of mild cognitive impairment. Commonly used criteria for a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment are: Deficient memory, preferably confirmed by another person Essentially normal judgment, perception and reasoning skills Largely normal activities of daily living Reduced performance on cognitive tests, compared with other people of similar age and educational background People with mild cognitive impairment may also experience: Depression Irritability Anxiety Aggression Apathy Causes Mild cognitive impairment often causes the same types of brain changes seen in Alzheimer's disease or other forms of dementia . The difference is in the extent of these changes, which is limited in mild cognitive impairment. These changes may include: Plaques, which are abnormal clumps of a protein called beta-amyloid Tangles, which are abnormal clumps of a protein called tau Shrinkage of the hippocampus, an area of the brain important for memory Strokes Lewy bodies, which are abnormal clumps of a protein that's associated with Parkinson's disease Risk factors A specific change in a gene, called apolipoprotein E (APOE), which has been linked to Alzheimer's disease High blood pressure Diabetes Low levels of physical, social and mental activity Fewer years of education Complications People with mild cognitive impairment are three times more likely to develop Alzheimer's or other dementias than are those without such impairment. In fact, about half the people with mild cognitive impairment will progress to Alzheimer's disease within five years. Diagnosis There is no specific test to confirm a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment. Instead, your doctor will try to rule out other potential causes for your symptoms. Tests may include the following. Neurological exam As part of your physical exam, your doctor may also check for signs of Parkinson's disease, strokes, tumors or other medical conditions that can impair memory as well as physical function. The neurological exam may test: Reflexes Eye movements Balance Sense of touch Mental status exam A short form of this type of test can be done in less than 10 minutes in your doctor's office. You may be asked to: Name today's date and your location Copy a design, such as intersecting pentagons Follow a three-stage command Remember a list of three words Follow a written direction Count backwards by sevens Draw a clock Longer forms of neuropsychological testing can take several hours. Your results are then compared with those of people from a similar age and education level. This can help distinguish normal from abnormal cognitive aging, and may help identify patterns in cognitive functions that provide clues to the underlying condition. Lab tests Simple blood tests can rule out physical problems that can affect memory, such as vitamin B-12 deficiency or an underactive thyroid gland. Brain scans Your doctor may order an MRI or CT scan to check for evidence of stroke or bleeding, and to rule out the possibility of a tumour. References http://www.alz.org/dementia/mild-cognitive-impairment-mci.asp http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mild-cognitive-impairment/basics/definition/con-20026392 http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1136393-overview http://www.nhs.uk/ipgmedia/national/macmillan%20cancer%20support/assets/mildcognitiveimpairmentmcs5pages.pdf Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin