Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Tadalafil Tambocor Tablets Tamiflu - (Oseltam... Tamox Tablets Tamoxifen Tablets Tamsulosin Tablets Tarceva Tablets -... Targaxan 550 mg Targin Tablets Tarivid (Ofloxacin... Tasmar Tablets - (... Tavanic Tablets (L... Tavegil (clemastin... Taxotere - (Doceta... Tears Naturale Tegretol Oral Susp... Tegretol Retard -... Tegretol Tablets -... Telfast Tablets Telmisartan Tablet... Tenoretic Tablets Tenormin Tablets Testogel (testoste... Tetralysal Tevetan Tablets -... Thalidomide The High-Tech Sche... Theophylline Table... Thorens Drops (Vit... Timoptol Eye Drops Tipuric Tablets -... Tolusitol Tablets Topamax - (topiram... Torvacol - (Atorva... Torvan - (Atorvast... Toujeo (insulin gl... Toviaz Tradol - (Tramadol... Trajenta - (linagl... Tramadol Capsules Trandate Tablets -... Transiderm-Nitro P... Travatan eye drops... Travocort Cream Traxam Gel Trelegy Ellipta Tresiba FlexTouch Tri-Minulet Tablet... Triadene Tablets Triapin (ramipril... Trileptal Tablets... Trimethoprim Table... Trinordiol Tablets Tritace - (Ramipri... Trosyl nail soluti... Trulicity (dulaglu... Truoxin - (Ciprofl... Tylex Capsules Tysabri - (Nataliz... Tyvense capsules Medicine - T Tadalafil Tadalafil works by preventing the action of a chemical in the body called phosphodiesterase type-5. This helps relax the blood vessels and keep them dilated for longer. Tambocor Tablets Tambocor tablets and injection, and Tambocor XL capsules all contain the active ingredient flecainide, which is a type of medicine called an anti-arrhythmic. Tamiflu - (Oseltamivir) Capsules/Suspension Tamiflu is a prescription medicine used to treat the flu (influenza) in people 2 weeks of age and older who have had flu symptoms for no more than 2 days. Tamiflu can also reduce the chance of getting the flu in people 1 year and older. Tamiflu is not a substitute for an annual flu vaccination. Tamox Tablets Tamox (Tamoxifen) is a drug commonly used as part of the treatment for some breast cancers. It belongs to a group of drugs known as hormone therapies and is also described as an anti-oestrogen drug. You will usually take Tamoxifen for five years although some people may be on it for longer Tamoxifen Tablets Tamoxifen is a drug commonly used as part of the&nbsp;treatment for some breast cancers.&nbsp; It belongs to a group of drugs known as hormone therapies and is also described as an anti-oestrogen drug.&nbsp; Tamsulosin Tablets Tamsulosin is an alpha-blocker that relaxes the muscles in the prostate and bladder neck, making it easier to urinate. Tamsulosin is used to improve urination in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate). Tarceva Tablets - (Erlotinib) Tarceva is a medicine used to treat cancer in the lung and in the pancreas. Targaxan 550 mg Targaxan contains the active substance rifaximin. Targaxan is an antibiotic that destroys bacteria, which can cause a disease called hepatic encephalopathy (symptoms include agitation, confusion, muscle problems, difficulty in speaking and in some cases coma). Targaxan is used in adults with liver disease to reduce the recurrence of episodes of overt hepatic encephalopathy. Targaxan can either be used alone or more commonly together with medicines containing lactulose (a laxative). Targin Tablets Targin tablets contain two active ingredients, oxycodone and naloxone. Oxycodone is a type of medicine called an opioid painkiller. Naloxone is a type of medicine called opioid antagonist. Tarivid (Ofloxacin) Tablets Tarivid (Ofloxacin) is used to treat bacterial infections such as chest, genito-urinary and skin infections in adults. It works by killing the bacteria which cause the infection. Tasmar Tablets - (Tolcapone) Tasmar (Tolcapone) is used together with other medications when all other alternative medications cannot stabilise your Parkinson’s disease. Tavanic Tablets (Levofloxacin) Tavanic tablets contain the active ingredient levofloxacin, which is a type of medicine called a quinolone antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Tavegil (clemastine) Tavegil tablets contain the active ingredient clemastine, which is a type of medicine called a sedating antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine. Taxotere - (Docetaxel) Taxotere (Docetaxel) is used to treat locally advanced breast cancer (cancer that is widespread in the breast area) or secondary breast cancer (cancer that has spread to other parts of the body). It may also be used to treat primary breast cancer as part of a clinical trial. Tears Naturale Tears naturale eye drops contain two active ingredients, hypromellose and dextran, which are known as eye lubricants. Tegretol Oral Suspension - (Carbamazepine) The active ingredient of Tegretol Oral Suspension is carbamazepine which is one of a group of medicines called anticonvulsants, used to treat epilepsy. Carbamazepine is also used to treat a painful condition of the face (trigeminal neuralgia) and also may be used to help prevent mood swings. Tegretol Retard - (Carbamazepine) The active ingredient of Tegretol Retard is carbamazepine. Carbamazepine is one of a group of medicines called anticonvulsants. It is used to treat epilepsy. Carbamazepine is also used to treat a painful condition of the face (trigeminal neuralgia) and also may be used to help prevent mood swings. Tegretol Tablets - (Carbamazepine) The active ingredient of Tegretol is carbamazepine. Carbamazepine is one of a group of medicines called anticonvulsants. It is used to treat epilepsy. Carbamazepine is also used to treat a painful condition of the face (trigeminal neuralgia) and also may be used to help prevent mood swings. Telfast Tablets Telfast 180mg tablets contain the active ingredient fexofenadine, which is an antihistamine medicine. Fexofenadine tablets are also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Telmisartan Tablets Micardis (Telmisartan) is used to treat essential hypertension (high blood pressure). ‘Essential’ means that the high blood pressure is not caused by any other condition. Micardis is also used to reduce cardiovascular events (i.e. heart attack or stroke) in patients who are at risk. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin