Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Eumovate Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Eumovate Cream/Ointment You are here: Home Eumovate Cream/Ointment Eumovate cream is a moderately potent topical corticosteroid indicated for adults, elderly, children and infants for the relief of the inflammatory and pruritic manifestations of steroid responsive dermatoses. What is Eumovate used for? Eumovate cream and ointment are prescribed to relieve skin inflammation and itching associated with inflamed skin conditions such as: Atopic eczema. Allergic contact dermatitis. Irritant contact dermatitis. Seborrhoeic dermatitis. Inflammation of the skin caused by ultra violet light (photodermatitis). Inflammation of the skin in skin folds or areas where skin surfaces rub together (intertrigo). Inflammation of the outer part of the ear canal (otitis externa). An eruption of hard nodules in the skin accompanied by intense itching (prurigo nodularis). Psoriasis. Nappy rash. Reactions to insect bites and stings. Your doctor may also ask you to use Eumovate as a maintenance treatment to help prevent eczema flare-ups after they've been controlled with a course of a stronger steroid cream. How does Eumovate work? Eumovate cream and ointment both contain the active ingredient clobetasone butyrate 0.05%, which is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. It's a moderate strength corticosteroid used to reduce inflammation in the skin. Skin inflammation happens when an allergic reaction or irritation of the skin causes various substances to be released in the skin that make blood vessels widen and result in the irritated area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful. Clobetasone acts inside the skin cells to stop the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces the swelling, redness and itching and so helps prevent scratching that can further irritate the skin. Eumovate ointment is more greasy than the cream. It is more suitable for very dry, scaly areas of skin, whereas moist or weepy skin is best treated with the cream. How do I use Eumovate? Eumovate cream or ointment should be applied thinly and evenly to the affected area(s) of skin once or twice a day, as directed by your doctor. Don't apply the cream or ointment to broken or infected areas of skin, unless the infection is also being treated. Don't apply it to the face unless instructed to by your doctor. Take care to avoid getting the cream or ointment in your eyes, mouth, nose or genital area. Rinse with cold water if accidental contact occurs. Wash your hands thoroughly after applying the cream or ointment, unless the hands are the area being treated. Don't cover the area being treated with airtight dressings such as bandages or other dressings unless directed by a doctor, as these increase the absorption of the medicine into the body and may increase the risk of side effects. If your doctor has advised you to use dressings with Eumovate, you should cleanse the skin before applying the cream or ointment under a fresh dressing. Be aware that children's nappies and waterproof pants can act as an airtight dressing and can increase the absorption of the medicine. You should continue using Eumovate for as long as your doctor has recommended. However, if you're using it on a child, it should preferably not be used for more than one to two weeks at a time. If you're using it the face it should preferably not be used for more than five days at a time. Always follow the instructions given by your doctor. Don't use Eumovate more often or for longer than advised by your doctor. If you think the area of skin you are treating has become infected you should stop using Eumovate and consult your doctor. Who shouldn't use Eumovate? Don't apply the cream to broken skin or open wounds, or areas of skin affected by any of the following conditions: Viral skin infections, such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores or herpes simplex. Bacterial skin infections, such as impetigo. Fungal skin infections, such as thrush, ringworm, athlete's foot. Acne. Acne rosacea. Inflammatory rash around the mouth (perioral dermatitis). Itching without any associated inflammation or rash. Don't use the cream or ointment if you're allergic to any of its ingredients. Check the ingredients listed in the leaflet that comes with the cream or ointment if you know you have specific allergies. Never use Eumovate cream or ointment as a moisturiser. Can I use Eumovate while pregnant or breastfeeding? Not unless you've discussed this with your doctor. If your doctor says you can use Eumovate while pregnant or breastfeeding you should not use it on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. This will minimise any absorption of the steroid. If you need to apply Eumovate to your breasts don't do this shortly before giving a feed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for further information. What are the possible side effects of Eumovate? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. Eumovate cream and ointment are generally well tolerated and side effects are very rare when it is applied sparingly, no more than twice a day. If you experience any signs of allergic reactions, such as burning, itching or redness of the skin after applying the cream or ointment, you should stop using it and consult your doctor. If Eumovate is applied excessively, more than twice a day, for long periods of time, underneath dressings, to broken or raw skin, thin areas of skin such as the face, large areas of skin, or areas of skin that rub together, it has more potential to cause some of the side effects associated with topical steroids, such as skin thinning, stretch marks or hair growth, although these are still very rare. You can read more about these here. Read the leaflet that comes with the cream or talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you want any more information about the possible side effects of Eumovate. Can I use Eumovate with other medicines? Make sure your doctor or pharmacist know if you're already using any other medicines, particularly if you're already using any other corticosteroid medicines (including those bought without a prescription) before you start using Eumovate as well. If you need to use other topical medicines on the same area of skin it's recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. If you also use a moisturiser it's best to apply it about 30 minutes before applying Eumovate. This will help soften the skin and improve the absorption of the corticosteroid. If you apply a moisturiser just before or after applying Eumovate this can dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. References: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12775314 https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a6692/eumovate-cream-and-ointment-clobetasone/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/3807/smpc https://www.nps.org.au/medical-info/medicine-finder/eumovate-cream http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/spcpil/documents/spcpil/con1523593597946.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) , Eczema , Psoriasis , Nappy Rash , Bee Stings Print This Page Health Reference Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Eczema Psoriasis Nappy Rash Bee Stings Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin