Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Canestan Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Canesten 500mg Pessary You are here: Home Canesten 500mg Pessary Canesten 500mg Pessary is recommended for the treatment of candidal vaginitis. What is Canesten 500mg pessary used for? Vaginal thrush (Candidal vaginitis). This single dose treatment should clear up the infection inside the vagina. However, you may also want to use a cream on the outside of the vagina (vulva and labia) to help relieve the external symptoms of the infection, such as itching, inflammation and soreness. Clotrimazole 1% or 2% creams are suitable for this. How does Canesten 500mg pessary work? Canesten 500mg pessary contains the active ingredient clotrimazole, which is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Clotrimazole kills the Candida fungi causing the thrush infection by interfering with their cell membranes. The cell membranes of fungi are vital for their survival. They keep unwanted substances from entering the cells and stop the contents of the cells from leaking out. Clotrimazole makes holes appear in these membranes, which kills the fungi and clears up the infection. The pessary is inserted into the vagina to allow the clotrimazole to act directly in the area of infection. How do I use Canesten 500mg pessary? The pessary should be inserted high into the vagina as a single dose at bedtime. Use the applicator provided. Follow the instructions provided in the pack. If you have your period you should wait until it's finished before using the pessary. You should consult your doctor if your symptoms have not got better within a week of using the pessary. What should I know before using Canesten 500mg pessary? Canesten pessaries may damage latex (rubber) condoms and diaphragms (caps) and so make them ineffective at preventing pregnancy and STIs. You should use an alternative method of contraception for at least five days after using this medicine, or preferably avoid having sex until after the infection has cleared up. Remember that having sex while you still have thrush is likely to transmit the infection to your partner, who could then give it back to you. If your sexual partner also has symptoms of thrush (in men these are soreness and redness of the penis, tightness of the foreskin or a white, odourless discharge from the penis), it is important that they are treated at the same time as you, for example with clotrimazole cream, to prevent you being re-infected. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice. Who shouldn't use Canesten 500mg pessary? People who are allergic to any ingredient of the medicine. Who should get medical advice before using Canesten 500mg pessary? You should consult your doctor before using this medicine if any of the following apply to you: This is the first time you have experienced symptoms of vaginal thrush. You have had more than two infections in the last six months. You are or could be pregnant. You are under 16 or over 60 years of age. You are allergic to any other vaginal antifungal products. You have irregular or abnormal vaginal bleeding. You have blood-stained or foul-smelling vaginal discharge. You have vulval or vaginal ulcers, blisters or sores. You have lower abdominal pain, pain passing urine, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting or diarrhoea. Can I use Canesten 500mg pessary while pregnant or breastfeeding? The safety of clotrimazole when used during pregnancy has not been specifically studied. However, it has been used by a large number of women during pregnancy without any apparent harmful effects. As with all medicines, you should consult your doctor or midwife before using this medicine during pregnancy. If your doctor says you can use this medicine while you are pregnant you should use your fingers, not the applicator, to insert the pessary. Since very little clotrimazole is absorbed into the bloodstream from the vagina it is unlikely that any of the medicine will pass into breast milk. However, as with all medicines, you should get medical advice from your doctor or pharmacist before using this medicine if you are breastfeeding. What are the possible side effects of Canesten 500mg pessary? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with Canesten 500mg pessary. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Vaginal irritation, for example burning, stinging, itching, redness, rash, blistering or peeling. Consult your doctor if you have a severe reaction to the pessary. You may experience some pelvic or abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding after using the pessary. Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more information about the possible side effects of this medicine. Can I use Canesten 500mg pessary with other medicines? In general, yes it's fine to use Canesten pessary if you are taking other medicines by mouth, injection, inhaler etc. However, don't use other vaginal medicines, vaginal douches, spermicides or tampons while using this medicine. If you are not sure, ask your pharmacist for advice. References: https://www.canesten.ie/?gclid=CjwKCAiA_P3jBRAqEiwAZyWWaJlpw_r-nH1KQeNlXh3OAJ2xwGlmcuYeS4vnHN8QWrU77DIicHIOzxoCW-gQAvD_BwE https://www.canesten.co.uk/en/female/products/canesten-thrush-combi-pessary-external-cream/ https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/infection/a7974/canesten-500mg-pessary-clotrimazole/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/2205/smpc &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin