Esomeprazole, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Esomeprazole You are here: Home Esomeprazole Esomeprazole is used to treat various stomach problems involving irritation due to stomach acid. Esomeprazole is a generic brand of Nexium. Why have I been prescribed Esomeprazole? Esomeprazole is used to treat the following conditions: ‘Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease’ &nbsp;(GORD). This is where acid from the stomach escapes into the gullet (the tube which connects your throat to your stomach) causing pain, inflammation and&nbsp; heartburn . Ulcers in the stomach or upper part of the gut (intestine) that are infected with bacteria called ‘Helicobacter pylori’. If you have this condition, your doctor may also prescribe&nbsp; antibiotics &nbsp;to treat the infection and allow the ulcer&nbsp;to heal. Stomach ulcers caused by medicines called&nbsp; NSAIDs &nbsp;(Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs). Esomeprazole can also be used to stop stomach ulcers&nbsp;from forming if you are taking&nbsp; NSAIDs . Too much acid in the stomach caused by a growth in the pancreas (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Prolonged treatment after prevention of rebleeding of ulcers&nbsp;with intravenous Esomeprazole. How does it work? Esomeprazole contains a medicine called esomeprazole. This belongs to a group of medicines called ‘proton pump inhibitors’. They work by reducing the amount of acid that your stomach produces. When and how do I use it? You can take your tablets at any time of the day. You can take your tablets with food or on an empty stomach. Swallow your tablets whole with a drink of water. Do not chew or crush the tablets. This is because the tablets contain coated pellets which stop the medicine from being broken down by the acid in your stomach. It is important not to damage the pellets. What to do if you have trouble swallowing the tablets Put them into a glass of still (non-fizzy) water. Do not use any other liquids. Stir until the tablets break up (the mixture will not be clear). Then drink the mixture straight away or within 30 minutes. Always stir the mixture just before drinking it. To make sure that you have drunk all of the medicine, rinse the glass very well with half a glass of water and drink it. The solid pieces contain the medicine - do not chew or crush them. If you cannot swallow at all, the tablet can be mixed with some water and put into a syringe. It can then be given to you through a tube directly into your stomach (‘gastric tube’). What’s the dose? Your dose will depend on what you are taking it for. Your doctor will tell you how much to take. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist&nbsp;if you are taking, or have recently taken, any other medicines. This includes medicines that you buy without a prescription. This is because Esomeprazole can affect the way some medicines work and some medicines can have an effect on Esomeprazole. Do not take Esomeprazole Tablets if you are taking a medicine containing nelfinavir (used to treat&nbsp; HIV ). Tell your doctor or pharmacist&nbsp;if you are taking any of the following medicines: Atazanavir (used to treat&nbsp; HIV ). Ketoconazole, itraconazole or voriconazole (used to treat infections caused by a fungus). Citalopram, imipramine&nbsp;or clomipramine (used to treat&nbsp; depression ). Diazepam &nbsp;(used to treat&nbsp; anxiety, &nbsp;relax muscles or in&nbsp; epilepsy) . Phenytoin (used in&nbsp; epilepsy) . If you are taking phenytoin , &nbsp;your doctor will need to monitor you when you start or stop taking Nexium. Medicines that are used to thin your blood, such as&nbsp; warfarin. &nbsp;Your doctor may need to monitor you when you start or stop taking Nexium. Cisapride (used for indigestion and heartburn ). If your doctor has prescribed the&nbsp; antibiotics &nbsp;amoxicillin and&nbsp; clarithromycin &nbsp;as well as Esomeprazole to treat ulcers&nbsp;caused by Helicobacter pylori infection, it is very important that you tell your doctor about any other medicines you are taking. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Esomeprazole can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. If you notice any of the following serious side effects, stop taking Esomeprazole and contact a doctor immediately: Sudden wheezing, swelling of your lips, tongue and throat or body, rash, fainting or difficulties in swallowing ( severe allergic reaction ). Reddening of the skin with blisters or peeling. There may also be severe blisters and bleeding in the lips, eyes, mouth, nose and genitals. This could be ‘Stevens-Johnson syndrome’ or ‘toxic epidermal necrolysis’. Yellow skin, dark urine and tiredness which can be symptoms of liver problems. These effects are rare, affecting less than 1 in 1,000 people. Other side effects include: Common&nbsp;(affects less than 1 in 10 people) Headache. Effects on your stomach or gut:&nbsp; diarrhoea, &nbsp;stomach pain,&nbsp; constipation , wind (flatulence). Feeling sick (nausea) or being sick (vomiting). Uncommon&nbsp;(affects less than 1 in 100 people) Swelling of the feet and ankles. Disturbed sleep ( insomnia) . Dizziness , tingling feelings such as “pins and needles”, feeling sleepy. Spinning feeling (vertigo). Dry mouth. Changes in blood tests that check how the liver is working. Skin rash, lumpy rash (hives) and&nbsp; itchy skin . Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Esomeprazole. Always check with your pharmacist&nbsp;or doctor first though as other medicines you may be taking might have a effect on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Before taking Nexazole, tell your doctor if you are pregnant or trying to get pregnant. Ask your doctor or pharmacist&nbsp;for advice before taking any medicine. Your doctor will decide whether you can take Esomeprazole during this time. It is not known if Esomeprazole passes into breast milk. Therefore, you should not take Esomeprazole if you are breastfeeding. If you have any more questions please ask your pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note:&nbsp; We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: Medicines.ie Website - Nexium SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/6796/SPC/Nexium+Tablets/ Medicines.ie Website- Nexium PIL&nbsp; http://www.nhs.uk/medicine-guides/pages/MedicineOverview.aspx?condition=Gastrointestinal%20ulcers&amp;medicine=Nexium http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/Esomeprazole.htm Read More &gt; Health Reference : GORD (gastro-oesophageal reflux disease) Print This Page More Videos... Indigestion Overview Health Reference GORD (gastro-oesophageal reflux disease) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin