Celluvisc, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Celluvisc You are here: Home Celluvisc Celluvisc eye drops contain the active ingredient carmellose sodium, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. It is used for the treatment of the symptoms of dry eye (such as soreness, burning, irritation or dryness) caused by your eye not producing enough tears to keep the eye wet. What is it used for? Dry eye conditions. How does it work? Celluvisc eye drops contain the active ingredient carmellose sodium, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. It is used for the treatment of the symptoms of dry eye (such as soreness, burning, irritation or dryness) caused by your eye not producing enough tears to keep the eye wet. Carmellose is a synthetic polymer that forms a viscous eye gel. It produces a transparent, lubricating and moistening film on the surface of the eye and is used as artificial tears. Carmellose clings to the surface of the eye and is therefore not washed out of the eye as quickly as some lubricating eye drops. How do I use it? Wash your hands before using the eye drops. Contact lenses need to be removed before using the 1% Celluvisc eye drops and can be put back in 15 minutes after application. With the 0.5% Celluvisc eye drops, contact lenses do not need to removed. One or two drops should be put into the eyes as needed. To avoid introducing germs into the eyes, don’t allow the open end of the single-dose container to touch your eye or anything else. Celluvisc eye drops come in single-dose units that are sterile and preservative-free. Each unit is for single use only. There should be enough in each dose unit to treat both eyes if required. Once you have put the drops in you should throw away the dose unit, even if there is some medicine left in it. Warning! These drops are for use in the eyes only. They must not be taken by mouth. After putting in the eye drops you may get slightly blurred vision. If your vision is affected it is recommended that you do not drive or use any machinery until your vision has cleared. If your eye irritation persists or gets worse after using these drops, or you experience a headache, eye pain, vision changes or continued redness, you should stop using these eye drops and consult your doctor. Not to be used in Known sensitivity or allergy to any ingredient. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. There are no known harmful effects when this medicine is used by pregnant or breastfeeding mothers. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Blurred vision after application. Eye pain or irritation. Increased production of tears. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? Tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you are using more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least 15 minutes before or after Celluvisc, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. Use eye gels or ointments last. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eyes/a8629/celluvisc-eye-drops-carmellose-sodium/ http://www.refreshbrand.com/Products/refresh-celluvisc https://www.drugs.com/sfx/celluvisc-side-effects.html &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Dry eyes Print This Page Health Reference Dry eyes Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin