Digoxin, Lynchs Pharmacy,Douglas. Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Digoxin You are here: Home Digoxin Digoxin is a medicine which is used in heart failure and heart rhythm disorders. Why have I been prescribed Digoxin? Digoxin is a medicine which is used in heart failure and heart rhythm disorders. How does it work? Digoxin increases the force of the heart's contraction. This increases the output of blood from the heart and helps to reduce the symptoms of&nbsp; heart failure. Digoxin also slows the heart rate and is used to help the heart beat more regularly in certain heart rhythm disorders. When and how do I take it? Digoxin is usually taken once daily but your dose will be tailored to suit you. What’s the dose? The dose of Digoxin for each patient has to be tailored individually according to age, body weight and how well their kidneys are working. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or pharmacist. You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Digoxin: acarbose adrenaline alprazolam amiodarone atorvastatin carbenoxolone carvedilol ciclosporin clarithromycin colestyramine diltiazem epoprostenol erythromycin felodipine flecainide gentamicin indometacin itraconazole kaolin pectin metoclopramide neomycin nifedipine penicillamine phenytoin prazosin propafenone propantheline quinidine quinine rifampicin salbutamol spironolactone sulfasalazine suxamethonium tetracycline tiapamil trimethoprim verapamil The following types of medicine may interact with Digoxin: ACE inhibitors antacids antibacterials beta-blockers calcium channel blockers corticosteroids cytostatics diuretics laxatives lithium salts macrolides p-glycoprotein inhibitors potassium depleting medicines If you are taking Digoxin and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Everyone's reaction to a medicine is different. It is difficult to predict which side-effects you will have from taking a particular medicine, or whether you will have any side-effects at all. The important thing is to tell your prescriber or pharmacist if you are having problems with your medicine. Common: More than 1 in 100 people who take Digoxin: blurred vision CNS disturbances diarrhoea ECG changes feeling&nbsp; dizzy irregular heart rate nausea skin rash or rashes urticaria vomiting Uncommon: More than 1 in 1000 people who take Digoxin: depression Very rare: Fewer than 1 in 10,000 people who take Digoxin: apathy blood problems breast enlargement in men confusion gastrointestinal problems general feeling of being unwell headaches loss of appetite psychosis or psychotic-like behaviour tiredness weakness Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Digoxin. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Lanoxin should only be during pregnancy if the doctor deems it necessary for the mothers health. Lanoxin can be used during pregnancy once the doctor agrees. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note:&nbsp; We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://xpil.medicines.org.uk/ViewPil.aspx?DocID=3937 http://www.drugs.com/lanoxin.html http://www.rxlist.com/lanoxin-tablets-drug/patient-images-side-effects.htm http://www.medbroadcast.com/Drug/GetDrug/Lanoxin https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/2178/SPC/Lanoxin+Tablets+0.25mg/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Heart failure , Heart disease Print This Page Health Reference Heart failure Heart disease Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin