Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Mesenteric Panniculitis Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Mesenteric panniculitis You are here: Home Mesenteric panniculitis Mesenteric panniculitis is a rare, benign and chronic fibrosing inflammatory disease that affects the adipose tissue of the mesentery of the small intestine and colon. The specific etiology of the disease is unknown. The diagnosis is suggested by computed tomography and is usually confirmed by surgical biopsies. What is it? Mesenteric panniculitis is a rare disease that affects the part of the mesentery that contains fat cells. The mesentery is a continuous fold of tissue in your abdomen.The mesentery is important because it supports your intestines and attaches them to the abdominal wall of your body. The specific cause of mesenteric panniculitis isn’t known, but may be related to autoimmune disease, abdominal surgery, injury to your abdomen, bacterial infection, or vascular problems. It causes chronic inflammation that damages and destroys fatty tissue in the mesentery. Over time, this can lead to scarring on the mesentery. The stages of the condition: Mesenteric lipodystrophy is the first stage. A type of immune system cell replaces fat tissue in the mesentery. Mesenteric panniculitis is the second stage. Additional types of immune system cells infiltrate the mesentery, and a lot of inflammation occurs during this stage. Retractile mesenteritis is the third stage. It’s when the inflammation is accompanied by scar tissue formation in the mesentery. Mesenteric panniculitis typically isn’t life-threatening. It may go away on its own, or it could develop into a severe disease. But while the inflammation is there, it can cause pain and other symptoms that interfere with your life. Your doctor can give you medicine to manage this inflammation and control symptoms. What are the symptoms? Symptoms vary from person to person. The clinical course may vary from no symptoms to severe and aggressive disease. If there’s enough inflammation in the mesentery, the swelling can put pressure on organs near your intestines. This pressure can cause abdominal pain. Other common symptoms include: nausea vomiting diarrhea constipation feeling full quickly after you eat loss of appetite weight loss bloating lump in your abdomen fatigue fever Symptoms can last for a few weeks or months, and then go away. Although the exact cause isn’t known, doctors think mesenteric panniculitis is possibly a type of autoimmune disease.&nbsp;Normally, your immune system fights off bacteria, viruses, and other germs that can make you sick. In an autoimmune disease, your immune system mistakenly attacks your body’s own tissues. In this case, it attacks the mesentery. This attack produces the inflammation that causes symptoms. How is it diagnosed? Mesenteric panniculitis is often misdiagnosed because it’s so rare. Sometimes doctors discover the disease incidentally when they do a CT scan to look for the cause of abdominal pain. This test can detect any signs of thickening or scarring in your mesentery. To make a diagnosis, your doctor may also have you undergo one or more blood tests to look for markers of inflammation in your body. This includes checking your erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level. How do you treat it? People with mesenteric panniculitis may not need treatment. Your doctor will monitor your symptoms and may do repeat CT scans to see if the inflammation is getting worse. It’s possible for mesenteric panniculitis will go away on its own within a few weeks or months. If your symptoms bother you or they cause complications, your doctor will give you medicine to bring down inflammation in your body. Many of the drugs used to treat this condition work by suppressing the overactive immune system response. Corticosteroid drugs are often used to treat mesenteric panniculitis. Other medicines that treat this condition include: azathioprine (Imuran) colchicine (Colgout) cyclophosphamide infliximab (Remicade) naltrexone (Revia) at a low dose How do you live with it? The goals of treatment for mesenteric panniculitis are reduction of mesenteric inflammation and the control of symptoms of the disease.Generally, individuals with no symptoms are not treated, but are regularly monitored to see whether the disorder progresses on abdominal imaging (watch and wait approach). A decision regarding biopsy is made during this time. In most patients, the disease remains asymptomatic. The mesenteric mass is generally stable or even regresses on its own. For patients with symptoms related to chronic mesenteric inflammation, anti-inflammatory agents, especially corticosteroids are the initial treatment of choice. Additional anti-inflammatory drugs that have been used to treat mesenteric panniculitis include colchicine, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, infliximab and pentoxifylline. A prospective clinical trial has demonstrated that the drug thalidomide improves symptoms and reduces blood levels of ESR and CRP in patients with mesenteric panniculitis. Low dose naltrexone (LDN) is also a promising new therapy for mesenteric panniculitis. LDN appears to work by modulating immune system and by increasing blood levels of enkephalins and endorphins. Author: Garvan James Lynch B.Sc.(Gen) N.U.I. B.Sc.(Hons) G.R.S.C. B.Sc.(Hons) Pharm. M.P.S.I. M.R.Pharm.S. M.B.A.(Healthcare) D.I.C. &nbsp; BENEFITS OF TELE-HEALTH Improves medicine safety: Evidence based Improves medicine compliance: Evidence based Improves health literacy: Evidence based Improves Health Outcomes: Evidence based Personalising Health: 1st pharmacy in Ireland Pharmacy Products Multivitamins/Omega 3 fish oils/Omacor Probiotics/Alflorex/Vitamin D/Psylium husk Pharmacy Services Home safety: Assessment checklist Homecare service pack TeleHealth Service: Helping cut out medical errors According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), the single best thing a person can do to improve their health is to improve their understanding of their health conditions and medicines. At Lynch's Pharmacy, we improve our customers health and quality of life by providing easily accessible and understandable information on medicines and health conditions in plain English. &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Imuran Tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin