Cyklokapron, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cyklokapron (tranexamic acid) You are here: Home Cyklokapron (tranexamic acid) Cyklokapron tablets contain the active ingredient tranexamic acid, which is a type of medicine called an antifibrinolytic. It can be used reduce severe unwanted bleeding, such as heavy menstrual bleeding, bleeding after bladder surgery or heavy nosebleeds. What is it used for? Tranexamic acid is used to prevent or treat bleeding in the following situations: Abnormally heavy bleeding during and after the surgical removal of the prostate gland (prostatectomy). Abnormally heavy bleeding during and after surgery on the bladder or cervix. Abnormally heavy periods (menorrhagia). Nose bleeds (epistaxis). Bleeding inside the eye as a result of injury. Tooth extractions in people with the blood clotting disorder haemophilia. A hereditary condition called angioneurotic oedema. How does it work? Cyklokapron tablets contain the active ingredient tranexamic acid, which is a type of medicine called an antifibrinolytic. It can be used reduce severe unwanted bleeding, such as heavy menstrual bleeding, bleeding after bladder surgery or heavy nosebleeds. Tranexamic acid tablets are also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Blood clots are made of red blood cells and platelets bound together with a substance called fibrin. Once they have fulfilled their normal purpose of stopping bleeding, the body dissolves clots by producing another substance called plasmin. Plasmin breaks down the fibrin and allows the clots to break up. Tranexamic acid stops the production of plasmin by blocking the action of the enzymes that produce it. This reduces the breakdown of fibrin and stops clots dissolving, which in turn helps to reduce bleeding. In women who have heavy menstrual bleeding there are higher than normal levels of the enzymes that produce plasmin in the lining of the womb. This causes blood clots in the womb lining to dissolve and increases the volume of blood that is shed with each period. Tranexamic acid stops these blood clots dissolving and so reduces the volume of blood loss. It can reduce menstrual blood loss by up to 58 per cent. Tranexamic acid is also used in other conditions where severe bleeding needs to be reduced. Use with caution in Decreased kidney function. People with a disease called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), where your blood starts to clot throughout your body. People at risk of blood clots in the blood vessels (thromboembolism, eg deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism), for example due to a personal or family history of blood clots. Diseases that cause abnormal blood clotting. People with blood in the urine (haematuria). Women with irregular periods (the cause of this should be investigated before you start taking this medicine). Not to be used in Severe kidney failure. People with a blood clot in the blood vessels (thromboembolism). This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy has not been fully established. This medicine is not recommended for use during pregnancy unless considered essential by your doctor. This medicine passes into breast milk, but the amount is considered too small to be harmful to a nursing infant. Seek further medical advice from your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common Diarrhoea. Vomiting. Nausea. Rare Allergic skin reactions such as itching, redness or swelling of skin. Blood clot in the eye Disturbance of colour vision. Blood clot in the blood vessels (thrombosis). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. This medicine will counteract the effect of fibrinolytic medicines used to disperse blood clots and will stop these from working. These medicines include the following: alteplase reteplase streptokinase tenecteplase urokinase. References: https://patient.info/medicine/tranexamic-acid-for-bleeding-cyklokapron http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/heart-and-blood/a6494/cyklokapron-tranexamic-acid/ http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/10387/SPC/Cyklokapron+500mg+Tablets/ https://www.drugs.com/cdi/cyklokapron.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/16512 https://www.nps.org.au/medical-info/medicine-finder/cyklokapron-tablets &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin