Clomipramine, Lynchs Pharmacy,Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Clomipramine You are here: Home Clomipramine Clomipramine is used to treat depression, obsessions and phobias (irrational fears). It is also used to treat muscular weakness (cataplexy) associated with repeat attacks of extreme sleepiness (narcolepsy) in adults. Why have I been prescribed Clomipramine? Clomipramine is used to treat&nbsp; depression , obsessions and phobias (irrational fears). It is also used to treat muscular weakness (cataplexy) associated with repeat attacks of extreme sleepiness (narcolepsy) in adults. How does it work? It is thought to work either by increasing the amount of chemicals in the brain known to be depleted in depression, or by making their effects last longer. When and how do I take it? Swallow your Clomipramine tablets or capsules whole with a drink of water. Keep taking your medicine until your doctor tells you to stop. Do not stop because you do not feel any better. This medicine may take up to 4 weeks to work. The medicine may be taken as one dose at night, or split into several smaller doses and taken throughout the day. Your doctor will tell you what to do. What’s the dose? The usual dosages for adults are as follows: For depression: &nbsp;10mg - 150mg daily. Severe cases may need even higher doses. For obsessions and phobias:&nbsp; 10mg - 150mg daily. For cataplexy:&nbsp; 10mg - 75mg daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Clomipramine interacts with a large number of other medicines. Make sure your doctor or pharmacist knows if you are taking any of the following: Medicines for depression particularly MAOIs e.g. tranylcypromine, phenelzine; SSRIs e.g.&nbsp; fluoxetine , fluvoxamine; tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants e.g. amitriptyline, dothiepin, maprotiline, barbiturates, benzodiazepines Medicines for other mental illnesses such as&nbsp; schizophrenia &nbsp;or manic depression e.g. thioridazine, lithium Medicines for&nbsp; high blood pressure Medicines to treat heart disorders, particularly those used to treat an abnormal heart rhythm Betablockers e.g atenolol Diuretics e.g. bendroflumethiazide, furosemide Anticoagulants (blood thinning tablets like&nbsp; warfarin ) Medicines for&nbsp; Parkinson's Disease Drugs which affect the liver (your doctor will know which these are). They include nicotine and barbiturates. Cold and flu drugs such as antihistamines and decongestants Carbamazepine or phenytoin (for&nbsp; epilepsy ) Cimetidine (for stomach problems) Methylphenidate ( Ritalin ®) prescribed for children with ADHD Quinine (for cramp or&nbsp; malaria &nbsp;treatment) Strong painkillers such as morphine or morphine related substances e.g. codeine, dihydrocodeine Drugs of abuse including Ecstasy Atropine or similar medicines (including eye drops) Oestrogens (e.g. contraceptive pill or hormone replacement therapy) Medicines, called protease inhibitors, used to treat&nbsp; Human Immunodeficiency Virus &nbsp;e.g. ritonavir, indinavir. Always tell your doctor or pharmacist about all the medicines you are taking. This means medicines you have bought yourself as well as medicines on prescription from your doctor. Herbal products should also only be taken after consulting with a doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Clomipramine is suitable for most people, but, like all medicines, it can sometimes cause side effects. The side effects are usually mild and disappear as treatment continues. Stop taking Clomipramine and tell your doctor immediately if you notice the following&nbsp; very rare symptoms: Rash, changes in blood pressure, swelling and increased fluid in tissues, an increased heart rate, difficulty with breathing and collapse. These may all be the signs of a severe&nbsp; allergic reaction . A high temperature and sweating with rigid muscles and confusion or agitation, or if you experience jerky muscle movements which you can’t control. These may be the symptoms of a serious condition known as neuroleptic malignant syndrome. The side effects listed below have also been reported: Increase in appetite and weight gain Headaches dizziness nausea constipation dry mouth increased sweating shaking hands tremor difficulty in passing urine problems with their eyes, feeling tired or sleepy sexual disturbances. Up to 1 in 10 people have experienced: Loss of appetite stomach upset vomiting diarrhoea lightheadedness when standing up (due to low blood pressure) increased&nbsp; anxiety agitation hot flushes enlarged pupils speech disturbance yawning feeling slightly confused disorientated or over-excited sleep disturbances nightmares hallucinations thought disturbances worsening of existing&nbsp; depression impaired memory and concentration restlessness disturbances in heart rhythm increased sensitivity of the skin to sunlight, rash and&nbsp; itching breast changes numbness or tingling in the arms and legs muscle weakness movement disorder changes in liver function tests taste disturbances tinnitus Up to 1 in 100 people have experienced: Mood changes including aggression fits movement disorders increased blood pressure Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Be careful when drinking alcohol - it may affect you more than usual. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Clomipramine&nbsp;should not be taken while pregnant unless your doctor deems it necessary. It should not be used while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=4074b555-7635-41a9-809d-fae3b3610059 http://www.rxlist.com/anafranil-drug.htm http://www.drugs.com/cdi/anafranil.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clomipramine http://www.emedicinehealth.com/drug-clomipramine/article_em.htm Read More &gt; Health Reference : Depression , Narcolepsy Print This Page Health Reference Depression Narcolepsy Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin