Betacap ScalpApplication, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betacap Scalp Application You are here: Home Betacap Scalp Application Betacap Scalp Application is for use on the scalp to treat skin diseases including psoriasis (scaly, pink patches of thickened skin) and seborrhoeic dermatitis (scaly, itchy patches of skin). Why have I been prescribed Betacap? Betacap Scalp Application is for use on the scalp to treat skin diseases including psoriasis (scaly, pink patches of thickened skin) and seborrhoeic dermatitis (scaly, itchy patches of skin). How does it work? Betacap contins a steroid called Betamethasone which works by reducing inflammation and calming down your immune system. The product also works as an antiseptic, and includes an emollient (moisturiser) to help make the scalp feel more comfortable. When and how do I take it? Use Betacap Scalp Application only on psoriasis and seborrhoeic dermatitis affecting the scalp. Before using this bottle of Betacap Scalp Application for the first time, turn the bottle cap anti-clockwise to break the seal. For adults and the elderly: Repeat the following twice a day, morning and evening, until you notice an improvement in your scalp condition. On days when you shampoo your&nbsp;hair, apply Betacap Scalp Application after drying the hair: Carefully turn the bottle upside-down over your head, holding the nozzle against the part of the scalp to be treated. Gently squeeze the bottle until the affected area is coated with a thin layer of the preparation. Gently massage the application into the scalp to prevent it from running off. Allow the treated scalp to dry naturally. Do not use a hair drier. Your scalp will feel cool until the liquid has dried. The active ingredient is then left on your scalp. Always wash your hands after use. When you can see that your scalp condition is getting better, you can start to apply Betacap Scalp Application less often, only once a day or&nbsp;even less. The frequency of application should be reduced to the minimum necessary to keep your scalp condition under control. For children (over one year old): Follow the same instructions as for adults (see above), but use the product more sparingly. Never apply more than is needed to cover the affected area. Do not cover the treated scalp with an airtight dressing. When treating seborrhoeic dermatitis in children, do not use the product for longer than 7 days. What’s the dose? See above. Could it interact with other tablets? Betacap Scalp Application is not known to affect, or to be affected by, any other medicines. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Betacap Scalp Application can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them: In rare cases skin irritation may occur. If this happens stop using the product. In rare cases, treating psoriasis with this type of product may cause the development of the pustular form of the disease (blisters filled with pus). This explains why careful supervision by your doctor is required if you are treating scalp psoriasis. Topical corticosteroids are usually well tolerated when used in the right amount and for the correct length of time. However, prolonged, excessive use, particularly in children or on skin that is bandaged or wrapped up, can cause local skin thinning (making the skin damage easily), and adrenal suppression (a type of hormone imbalance that causes generalised effects on the body). Stopping treatment normally corrects these side effects. If you are in any doubt about the treatment, or experience any of the above side effects or any other side effect not mentioned in this leaflet, stop using this product and tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between Betacap and alcohol. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? It is unclear whether this product is safe for use during pregnancy and breast-feeding.&nbsp; You should therefore not normally use this product if you are pregnant or breast-feeding unless your doctor has recommended you to do so. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topical_steroid http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6296/betacap-scalp-application-betamethasone/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/PIL.3416.latest.pdf http://www.drugs.com/uk/betacap-scalp-application-spc-355.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin