Ciprager, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Ciprager Tablets - Citalopram You are here: Home Ciprager Tablets - Citalopram Ciprager (Citalopram) is used for the treatment of depression and when you feel better, to help prevent these symptoms recurring. Further, Ciprager is used for long-term treatment to prevent the occurrence of new depressive episodes in patients who have recurrent depression. Why have I been prescribed Ciprager? Ciprager (Citalopram) is used for the treatment of depression and when you feel better, to help prevent these symptoms recurring. Further, Ciprager is used for long-term treatment to prevent the occurrence of new depressive episodes in patients who have recurrent depression . Ciprager is also beneficial in relieving symptoms in patients prone to panic attacks . Your doctor, however, may prescribe Ciprager for another purpose. Ask your doctor if you have any questions about why Ciprager has been prescribed for you. How does it work? Ciprager contains an antidepressant drug called an SSRI. It increases the amount of a chemical (serotonin) in the brain which is known to be lowered in depression. When and how do I take it? Ciprager is taken every day as a single daily dose. Ciprager can be taken any time of the day with or without food . Swallow the tablets with a drink of water. Do not chew them (they have a bitter taste). What’s the dose? Adults: Depression: The usual dose is 20 mg per day. This may be increased by your doctor to a maximum of 60 mg per day. Panic disorder: The starting dose is 10 mg per day for the first week before increasing the dose to 20-30 mg per day. The dose may be increased by your doctor to a maximum of 60 mg per day. Elderly patients (above 65 years of age): Elderly patients should not usually receive more than 40 mg per day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without prescription. Some drugs may affect the action of another and this can sometimes cause serious adverse reactions. When using Ciprager with the following medicines, caution should be exercised: lithium (used in the prophylaxis and treatment of manic-depressive disorder) and tryptophan; if you get high fever and abrupt contractions of muscles, feel agitated and confused you must see your doctor immediately. selegiline (used for Parkinson's disease); the dose of selegiline must not exceed 10 mg per day. metoprolol (used for high blood pressure and/or heart disease); the blood levels of metoprolol are increased, but signs of increased effect or side effects of metoprolol have not been recorded. sumatriptan and similar medicines (used to treat migraine); risk of side effects; if you get any unusual symptoms when using this combination you should see your doctor. cimetidine, when used in high doses (used to treat stomach ulcers); blood levels of Ciprager may be increased but increased side effects of Ciprager have not been recorded. drugs known to affect the platelet function (e.g. some antipsychotic drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, acetylsalicylic acid (used as pain killers), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (used for arthritis); slightly increased risk of bleeding abnormalities. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) - concomitant intake with Ciprager may increase the risk of side effects. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Some patients have reported the following serious side effects. If you get any of the following symptoms you should stop taking Ciprager and see your doctor immediately: • high fever, agitation, confusion, trembling and abrupt contractions of muscles;&nbsp;these may be signs of a rare condition called serotonin syndrome which has been reported with the combined use of antidepressants • If you experience swelling of skin, tongue, lips, or face, or have difficulties breathing or swallowing (allergic reaction) • Unusual bleeds, including gastrointestinal bleeds Very common side effects (in more than 1 out of 10 persons) may include: Feeling sleepy Sleeplessness Increased sweating Dry mouth Nausea (feeling sick) Common side effects (in more than 1 but less than 10 out of 100 patients) may include: Decreased appetite Agitation Decreased sex drive Anxiety Nervousness Confusion state Tremor Ringing in the ears (tinnitus) Yawning Diarrhoea Vomiting Itching Pain in muscle and joints Men may experience problems with ejaculation and erection, For females, failure to achieve an orgasm Fatigue Prickling of the skin Decreased weight. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Ciprager has been shown not to increase the effects of alcohol. Nevertheless, it is recommended not to drink alcohol during treatment with Ciprager. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Pregnant women should not usually take Ciprager nor should mothers breast-feed their babies while taking this medicine. If absolutely necessary your doctor may tell you to continue taking ciprager while pregnant or breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://patient.info/medicine/citalopram-cipramil-paxoran https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citalopram https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2145702.PPA0465_068_002.c1bd5957-421d-4b67-a53d-6c87f38c2bcc.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved.141013.pdf http://www.drugs.com/uk/cipramil-10mg-film-coated-tablets-leaflet.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/depression/a6409/cipramil-citalopram/ http://www.mydr.com.au/medicines/cmis/cipramil-tablets &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Depression , Panic Attacks Print This Page More Videos... What is Depression? Health Reference Depression Panic Attacks Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin