Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Vagifem vaginal ta... Valcyte (valgancic... Valdoxan Tablets Valium Tablets - (... Vallergan Tablets/... Valoid Valsartan Tablets Valsartan/Hydrochl... Valtrex - (Valacic... Vancocin (Vancomyc... Vaniqa Cream Vascace Tablets Venex XL Capsules... Venlafaxine Capsul... Venlofex Capsules... Ventolin Diskus Ventolin Evohaler... Ventolin Nebules Ventolin Syrup Vermox Tablets/Sus... Versatis medicated... Vesitirim (solifen... Viagra - (Sildenaf... Vibramycin - (Doxy... Victoza Injection Vidisic 0.2 % w/w... Vimovo Vimpat (lacosamide... Violite Tablets Vitamin D Vizarsin (Sildenaf... Voltarol (Diclofen... Volumatic Device Medicine - V Vagifem vaginal tablets Vagifem vaginal tablets (or pessaries) contain the active ingredient estradiol hemihydrate, which is a naturally occuring form of the main female sex hormone, oestrogen. Valcyte (valganciclovir) We explain everything you need to know about taking the antiviral valganciclovir for CMV infection. Valdoxan Tablets Valdoxan (Agomelatine) belongs to a group of medicines called antidepressants and you have been given Valdoxan to treat your depression. Valium Tablets - (Anxicalm) Valium is used for: Anxiety and problems sleeping (insomnia). Muscle spasms (cramps) such as those caused by cerebral spasticity. Epilepsy (fits). Making you relaxed before an operation (premedication). Vallergan Tablets/Syrup Vallergan is derived from a group of medicines called phenothiazines, and is a type of medicine called a sedating antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine.a Valoid Cyclizine is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It is used to prevent and treat nausea and vomiting associated with middle ear disorders, motion (travel sickness) and following surgery or radiotherapy. Valsartan Tablets Valsartan 40 mg, 80mg and 160mg fi lm-coated tablets can be used: to treat people after a recent heart attack (myocardial infarction). “Recent” here means between 12 hours and 10 days. to treat symptomatic heart failure. Valsartan/Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets Valsartan/Hydrochlorothiazide&nbsp;tablets contain two active ingredients, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide. Tablets containing valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide are also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Valtrex - (Valaciclovir) Valtrex is known as a pro-drug. Once inside the body it is broken down into the active ingredient aciclovir. Aciclovir works by preventing the herpes viruses from multiplying. This stops the growth of the virus. Vancocin (Vancomycin) Capsules Vancomycin is an antibiotic used to treat infections. This form of vancomycin is used to treat a certain intestinal condition (colitis) caused by bacteria. This condition causes diarrhea and stomach/abdominal discomfort or pain. When vancomycin is taken by mouth, it stays in the intestines to stop the growth of certain bacteria that cause these symptoms. This antibiotic treats only bacterial infection in the intestines. It will not work for bacterial infections in any other part of the body or for viral infections (such as common cold, flu). Using any antibiotic when it is not needed can cause it to not work for future infections. Vaniqa Cream Vaniqa cream contains the active ingredient eflornithine, which is a medicine used to reduce the rate of unwanted facial hair growth in women. This is a condition called hirsutism. Vascace Tablets Vascace (Cilazapril) is used for the treatment of raised blood pressure and, when used with digitalis (a medicine which increases the strength of the heart) and/or diuretics (water tablets), it is used for the treatment of chronic heart failure. Venex XL Capsules - (Venlafaxine) Venex XL (Venlafaxine) is a treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Venlafaxine Capsules Venlafaxine is a&nbsp;treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Venlofex Capsules - (Venlafaxine) Venlofex (Venlafaxine) is a treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Ventolin Diskus Ventolin (salbutamol) is a bronchodilator that relaxes muscles in the airways and increases air flow to the lungs. Ventolin Evohaler - (Salbutamol) Ventolin (salbutamol) is a bronchodilator that relaxes muscles in the airways and increases air flow to the lungs. Ventolin Nebules Ventolin (salbutamol) is a bronchodilator that relaxes muscles in the airways and increases air flow to the lungs. Ventolin Syrup Ventolin (salbutamol) is a bronchodilator that relaxes muscles in the airways and increases air flow to the lungs. Vermox Tablets/Suspension Vermox tablets and suspension contain the active ingredient mebendazole, which is a type of medicine called an anthelmintic. It is used to treat certain types of worm infections of the gut. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin