Cystic Fibrosis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cystic Fibrosis You are here: Home Cystic Fibrosis Cystic fibrosis can cause severe lung damage and nutritional deficiencies and is a life threatening disease. What is it? In CF, the secretions that are normally&nbsp; thin and slippery in the body, like in the airways, become thick and sticky because of a defective gene. The secretions plug up tubes, ducts and passageways, especially in the pancreas and lungs. It is an inherited disease. How do I recognise it? Often the first signs of cystic fibrosis noticed is a salty taste to the skin. Parents often can taste the salt when they kiss their child. Most of the other signs and symptoms of cystic fibrosis affect the respiratory system or the digestive system.: Persistent cough Wheezing Repeated lung infections Repeated sinus infections Foul-smelling, greasy stools Poor weight gain and growth Distended abdomen from constipation Intestinal blockage, particularly in newborns&nbsp; Causes Cystic Fibrosis is caused by a defective gene which alters the amount of salt in the bodies secretions, making them thick and sticky when they should be thin and slippery. How do you treat it? Like any disease, even if there is no cure, there is almost always something you can do to manage it and take control. There are three main areas involved in the treatment of any disease: Conventional medicines Complementary medicines Complementary therapies For information on medicines and therapies relevant to Cystic Fibrosis, make an appointment at Lynch's Pharmacy, Broadale, Douglas, Cork at 021-4366923. Learn all about the drugs used to treat the disease and any complementary medicines or therapies proven to help. Equip yourself with the tools to manage the condition and not be managed by it. How do you live with it? Certain adjustments may be needed to get on with your life, and often, some simple tips and advice can go a long way to making these changes.&nbsp; When you come to a Lynch's Pharmacy Clinic, we provide you all the necessary information available to make your life more manageable and allow you to better live with your condition. References Cystic Fibrosis-http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cystic_fibrosis Cystic Fibrosis, a comprehensive overview-http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/cystic-fibrosis/DS00287 Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Creon Capsules Medicine Reference Creon Capsules Erdotin Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin