Growing pains | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Growing pains You are here: Home Growing pains Your 8-year-old daughter can&#039;t fall asleep because her legs hurt. Your friend&#039;s 6-year-old son wakes up in tears with the same complaint. Coincidence? What is it? Your 8-year-old daughter can't fall asleep because her legs hurt. Your friend's 6-year-old son wakes up in tears with the same complaint. Coincidence? Probably not. Some children experience occasional nighttime leg pain without an apparent cause — often called growing pains. Growing pains aren't a disease. In fact, the term "growing pains" may be a misnomer because there's no evidence that growth hurts. Still, growing pains are real for many kids. And it's important to take your child's complaints seriously. Occasionally, what seems like growing pains are really due to an underlying condition that can be treated. Growing pains typically end by the teen years. In the meantime, simple comfort measures can help your child make it through the night. Symptoms Growing pains are often described as an ache or throb in the legs — often in the front of the thighs, the calves or behind the knees. Usually both legs hurt. Some children may also experience abdominal pain or headache during episodes of growing pains. Growing pains often strike in the late afternoon or early evening and disappear by morning. Sometimes the pain awakens a child in the middle of the night. Causes There's no evidence that a child's growth is painful. However, running, climbing and jumping can be hard on a child's musculoskeletal system. Muscle pain at night from overuse during the day is the most likely cause of what's called growing pains. Risk factors Growing pains are most common from ages 2 to 12 and are slightly more common in girls than in boys. Running, climbing or jumping during the day might increase the risk of leg pain at night. Diagnosis Your child's doctor will do a physical exam and ask questions about your child's signs and symptoms. Other specific conditions — such as restless legs syndrome, which is characterized by unpleasant sensations in the legs and an uncontrollable urge to move them for relief — must be ruled out before your child's leg pain can be attributed to growing pains. Rarely, the doctor may use blood tests, X-rays or other diagnostic tests to help determine the cause of your child's leg pain. References: https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/health/healthyliving/growing-pains http://kidshealth.org/en/parents/growing-pains.html http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/growing-pains/pages/introduction.aspx https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Growing_Pains https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/orthopedic/Pages/Growing-Pains-Are-Normal-Most-Of-The-Time.aspx &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Paracetamol for Adults Paracetamol for Children - Calpol/Paralink Ibuprofen (Nurofen/Melfen/Brufen) Tablets Ibuprofen for Children from 3 months plus Zydol (Tramadol) When to call the GP - For the Parents of Baby&#039;s Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin