Cobalin H, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cobalin-H Injection You are here: Home Cobalin-H Injection Hydroxocobalamin is an injectable form of vitamin B12 that is given when there are problems with absorption of this vitamin from the gut. Hydroxocobalamin is used for: Treating anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency due to a number of conditions, including poor diet, and for the Schilling test. Hydroxocobalamin is a vitamin. It works by increasing levels of vitamin B12 in conditions in which it is needed. Do NOT use hydroxocobalamin if: you are allergic to any ingredient in hydroxocobalamin Contact your doctor or health care provider right away if any of these apply to you. Before using hydroxocobalamin: Some medical conditions may interact with hydroxocobalamin. Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you have any medical conditions, especially if any of the following apply to you: if you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding if you are taking any prescription or nonprescription medicine, herbal preparation, or dietary supplement if you have allergies to medicines, foods, or other substances Some MEDICINES MAY INTERACT with hydroxocobalamin. Tell your health care provider if you are taking any other medicines, especially any of the following: Omeprazole because the effectiveness of hydroxocobalamin may be decreased This may not be a complete list of all interactions that may occur. Ask your health care provider if hydroxocobalamin may interact with other medicines that you take.&nbsp; How to use hydroxocobalamin: Use hydroxocobalamin as directed by your doctor. Check the label on the medicine for exact dosing instructions. Hydroxocobalamin is usually administered as an injection at your doctor's office, hospital, or clinic. If you are using hydroxocobalamin at home, carefully follow the injection procedures taught to you by your health care provider. If hydroxocobalamin contains particles or is discolored, or if the vial is cracked or damaged in any way, do not use it. Keep this product, as well as syringes and needles, out of the reach of children and away from pets. Do not reuse needles, syringes, or other materials. Dispose of properly after use. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain local regulations for proper disposal. If you miss a dose of hydroxocobalamin, use it as soon as possible. If it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular dosing schedule. Do not use 2 doses at once. Ask your health care provider any questions you may have about how to use hydroxocobalamin. Important safety information: Do not take large doses of vitamins (megadoses or megavitamin therapy) unless directed to by your doctor. PREGNANCY and BREAST-FEEDING: If you become pregnant while taking hydroxocobalamin, discuss with your doctor the benefits and risks of using hydroxocobalamin during pregnancy. It is unknown if hydroxocobalamin is excreted in breast milk. If you are or will be breast-feeding while you are using hydroxocobalamin, check with your doctor or pharmacist to discuss the risks to your baby. Possible side effects of hydroxocobalamin: All medicines may cause side effects, but many people have no, or minor, side effects. When used in small doses, no COMMON side effects have been reported with this product. Seek medical attention right away if any of these SEVERE side effects occur: Severe allergic reactions (rash; hives ; difficulty breathing; tightness in the chest; swelling of the mouth, face, lips, or tongue); changes in blood pressure; diarrhoea ; fainting; flushing; itching; leg pain; pain or redness at the injection site; swelling. This is not a complete list of all side effects that may occur. Side effects: If any of the following side effects occur while taking hydroxocobalamin, check with your doctor or nurse immediately: More common: Blurred vision dizziness headache nervousness pounding in the ears redness of the skin slow or fast heartbeat Incidence not known: Bloating or swelling of the face, arms, hands, lower legs, or feet cough difficult or labored breathing difficulty with swallowing feeling of warmth hives or welts, itching, or skin rash large, hive-like swelling on the , eyelids, lips, tongue, throat, hands, legs, feet, or sex organs puffiness or swelling of the eyelids or around the eyes, face, lips, or tongue rapid weight gain redness of the face, neck, arms, and occasionally, upper chest sudden sweating tightness in the chest tingling of the hands or feet unusual tiredness or weakness unusual weight gain or loss More common: Blemishes on the skin dry, red, hot, or irritated skin nausea pimples red colored urine Incidence not known: Acid or sour stomach being forgetful belching diarrhoea heartburn indigestion redness or swelling of the eyes restlessness stomach discomfort, upset, or pain Usual Adult Dose for Vitamin B12 Deficiency Uncomplicated disease: Initial dose: 30 mcg IM once daily for 5 to 10 days, or 100 mcg IM once daily for one week, followed by 100 mcg IM every other day for 2 weeks. Maintenance dose: 100 to 200 mcg IM once a month Complicated disease: Initial dose: 1000 mcg IM once with folic acid 15 mg, followed by 100 mcg once daily with folic acid 5 mg daily for 1 week Maintenance dose: 100 to 200 mcg IM once a month If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydroxocobalamin http://www.medicinenet.com/hydroxocobalamin-injectable/article.htm https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/22177/SPC/Hydroxocobalamin+Injection+BP+1mg+ml/ http://www.drugs.com/drug-interactions/hydroxocobalamin.html http://patient.info/medicine/hydroxocobalamin-injection-cobalin-h-neo-cytamen http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/diet-and-nutrition/a6879/hydroxocobalamin/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Anaemia Print This Page Health Reference Anaemia Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin