Lynch's Pharmacy, Douglas, Cholestagel Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cholestagel Tablets You are here: Home Cholestagel Tablets Cholestagel tablets contain the active ingredient colesevelam, which is a type of medicine called a bile acid sequestrant. It is used to lower blood cholesterol levels. What is it used for? High blood cholesterol levels (primary hypercholesterolaemia). Cholestagel can be used in combination with a statin medicine (for example simvastatin, atorvastatin) when treatment with a statin has not lowered cholesterol levels enough. Cholestagel can also be used on its own to lower cholesterol levels when statin treatment is not appropriate or causes unacceptable side effects. How does it work? Cholestagel tablets contain the active ingredient colesevelam, which is a type of medicine called a bile acid sequestrant. It is used to lower blood cholesterol levels. Colesevelam is not absorbed into the bloodstream. It works in the intestines, where it binds to bile acids. Bile is a fluid that is produced by the liver. It is released into the intestine through the bile duct as part of digestion. Bile contains substances called bile acids, which the liver makes from cholesterol in the blood. Bile acids aid the digestion of fats consumed in the diet. Following digestion, the bile acids are reabsorbed into the bloodstream and are then returned to the liver. Colesevelam binds to the bile acids in the intestine and prevents them being reabsorbed into the bloodstream. Instead, they pass through the intestine with the colesevelam and are excreted in the faeces. This triggers the liver to produce more bile acids from the cholesterol in the blood, which lowers the level of cholesterol in the blood. High cholesterol levels increase the risk of heart disease by clogging and narrowing the arteries (atherosclerosis). Colesevelam is used to lower cholesterol levels and thus reduce the risk of hardening of the arteries and the problems this can cause. Medicines are used to lower high cholesterol levels when a low-cholesterol diet and exercise regime have not done this sufficiently. However, it is important to continue to follow your cholesterol-lowering diet while taking this medicine. Discuss this with your doctor. Use with caution in Coronary heart disease or angina pectoris. Raised triglyceride levels (above 3.4 mmol/L). Liver failure. People who are susceptible to vitamin K or fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, such as people with malabsorption. People with any swallowing disorders, such as difficulty or pain when swallowing. People with severe disorders of the stomach and intestines that affect the passage of material through the gut. Inflammatory bowel disease, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis . People who have had major surgery on their stomach or intestines. Not to be used in Blockage of the bile duct (biliary obstruction). Blockage of the bowel. This medicine is not recommended for children and adolescents. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy has not been established. The manufacturer states that it should be used with caution in pregnancy. Seek medical advice from your doctor. The safety of this medicine for use in breastfeeding women has not been established. The manufacturer states that it should be used with caution by breastfeeding mothers. Seek medical advice from your doctor. Label warnings Take this medication with or after food. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Very common&nbsp; Constipation. Flatulence Common&nbsp; Headache. Raised levels of fats called triglycerides in the blood. Vomiting. Nausea. Diarrhoea Indigestion. Abdominal pain. Abnormal stools. Uncommon Muscle pain. Increased liver enzymes. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. Colesevelam may interfere with the absorption of other medicines from the gut if they are taken at the same time as this medicine. To avoid this, other medicines should be taken at least four hours before or four hours after taking Cholestagel tablets. However, statins such as atorvastatin and simvastatin CAN be taken at the same time of day as Cholestagel. Colesevelam can affect the absorption of ciclosporin, an immunosuppressant. If this medicine is used in combination with ciclosporin, then it should be taken at least four hours after the ciclosporin dose. It is also necessary to follow a set routine for when taking colesevelam in combination with ciclosporin. This means that you should keep to a set pattern for taking these two medicines, for example regularly taking ciclosporin at 8am, then Cholestagel tablets four hours later. If you are taking a combined oral contraceptive pill, there may be a risk that this medicine could make it less effective at preventing pregnancy. This can be avoided by taking the Cholestagel at least four hours after the oral contraceptive. Colesevelam may change the anti-blood-clotting effect of anticoagulant medicines such as warfarin, nicoumalone and phenindione. If you are taking any of these your blood clotting time (INR) may need to be monitored more frequently. References: https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/20988 http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/heart-and-blood/a8664/cholestagel-colesevelam/ https://www.drugs.com/uk/cholestagel.html http://www.medicalook.com/reviews/CholestaGel.html http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Summary_for_the_public/human/000512/WC500025675.pdf http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/17149/SPC/Cholestagel+625+mg+film+coated+tablets/#MACHINEOPS &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Cholesterol Explained , Cholesterol Management Print This Page Health Reference Cholesterol Explained Cholesterol Management Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin