Avelox, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Avelox - (Moxifloxacin) You are here: Home Avelox - (Moxifloxacin) Moxifloxacin is used to treat a variety of bacterial infections (such as bronchitis, pneumonia and sinusitis). It is used to treat these infections in people who have not improved with other antibiotic treatment or in people who cannot be treated with other antibiotics. What is Avelox? Avelox (moxifloxacin) is an antibiotic in a group of drugs called fluoroquinolones. Moxifloxacin fights bacteria in the body. Avelox is used to treat different types of bacterial infections. Avelox may also be used for purposes not listed here. Before taking Avelox Before taking moxifloxacin make sure your doctor or pharmacist knows: If you are pregnant, trying for a baby or breast-feeding. If you suffer from heart rhythm disturbances or other heart problems. If you have heart failure (a condition where the pumping action of the heart is reduced). If you have liver disease. If you have ever suffered from tendon or muscular problems. If you have ever had epilepsy &nbsp;or fits. If you have myasthenia gravis (a condition causing tired and weak muscles). If you are under 18 years of age or over 60 years of age. If you have ever had a mental health problem such as psychosis or depression . If you suffer from glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (a rare enzyme disorder). If you are taking any other medicines including those available to buy without a prescription, herbal or complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to this or to any other medicine. How to take Avelox Before beginning treatment, read the manufacturer's printed information leaflet. Take moxifloxacin exactly as your doctor has told you. It is usually taken once each day. Try to take moxifloxacin at the same time each day to avoid missing any doses. If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember and then continue as normal. Do not take two doses together to make up for a missed dose. Unless you have been told otherwise, you must complete the course of moxifloxacin otherwise the infection may come back. Swallow moxifloxacin tablets whole (not chewed or crushed) with a drink of water. They may be taken either before or after meals. What should I avoid while taking Avelox? You may be taking certain other medicines that should not be taken at the same time as Avelox. Avoid taking the following medicines within 8 hours before or 4 hours after you take Avelox. These other medicines can make Avelox much less effective when taken at the same time: antacids that contain magnesium or aluminum (such as Maalox); the ulcer medicine sucralfate (Antepsin); vitamin or mineral supplements that contain iron or zinc. Avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds. Avelox can make you sunburn more easily. Wear protective clothing and use sunscreen (SPF 30 or higher) when you are outdoors. Call your doctor if you have severe burning, redness, itching, rash, or swelling after being in the sun. Antibiotic medicines can cause diarrhoea , which may be a sign of a new infection. If you have diarrhea that is watery or bloody, stop taking Avelox and call your doctor. Do not use anti- diarrhoea medicine unless your doctor tells you to. Avelox may impair your thinking or reactions. Be careful if you drive or do anything that requires you to be alert. Avelox side effects Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction to Avelox: hives; difficult breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Stop using Avelox and call your doctor at once if you have a serious side effect such as: severe dizziness, fainting, fast or pounding heartbeats; sudden pain, snapping or popping sound, bruising, swelling, tenderness, stiffness, or loss of movement in any of your joints; diarrhea that is watery or bloody; confusion, hallucinations, depression , insomnia or nightmares, unusual thoughts or behavior, feeling light-headed; seizure (convulsions); severe headache , ringing in your ears, dizziness , nausea, vision problems, pain behind your eyes; pale or yellowed skin, dark colored urine, fever, weakness; urinating less than usual or not at all; easy bruising or bleeding; numbness, tingling, or unusual pain anywhere in your body; the first sign of any skin rash, no matter how mild; or severe skin reaction -- fever, sore throat, swelling in your face or tongue, burning in your eyes, skin pain, followed by a red or purple skin rash that spreads (especially in the face or upper body) and causes blistering and peeling. Less serious Avelox side effects may include: nausea, mild diarrhoea ; headache, dizziness; blurred vision; feeling nervous, anxious , or agitated; mild skin itching. This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. How to store Avelox Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/Moxifloxacin.htm http://www.rxlist.com/avelox-drug.htm http://www.drugs.com/avelox.html http://www.avelox.com/en/intro/index.php http://www.webmd.com/drugs/drug-17879-Avelox+Oral.aspx?drugid=17879&amp;drugname=Avelox+Oral http://voices.yahoo.com/avelox-antibiotic-avelox-side-effects-sinusitis-543831.html http://chealth.canoe.ca/drug_info_details.asp?brand_name_id=5298 Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin