Alprazolam Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Alprazolam You are here: Home Alprazolam Alprazolam tablets are only used to treat severe anxiety and severe anxiety associated with depression. Why have I been prescribed Alprazolam? Alprazolam tablets are only used to treat&nbsp; severe anxiety &nbsp;and&nbsp;severe anxiety&nbsp;associated with&nbsp; depression . How does it work? Alprazolam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines. These work by increasing the amount of a certain chemical in the brain which calms the brain down and stops the nerves firing inappropriately. When and how do I take it? Alprazolam tablets are only used for short-term treatment (not more than 12 weeks). You will not normally be given a prescription for more than 4 weeks and you will be regularly reviewed by your doctor during this time. Always see your doctor before you stop taking Alprazolam tablets as the dose needs to be reduced gradually. If you stop taking the tablets or reduce the dose suddenly you can get ‘rebound’ effects which might cause you to become temporarily more&nbsp; anxious &nbsp;or restless or to have difficulty sleeping. What’s the dose? Adults You will usually start by taking a dose of 500 micrograms to 1 mg. This medicine is taken in divided doses two or three times daily. This dose may be increased gradually up to a total of 3mg to 4mg again taken in divided doses throughout the day. Where the dose does need to be increased, it is usual to increase the night time dose first, before the daytime doses to make sure you are more alert during the day. Taking the medicine at bedtime also reduces the risk of having memory problems. If you start to get side effects the doctor may lower your dose. The elderly If you are an older patient or you have for example&nbsp; kidney &nbsp;or&nbsp; liver problems &nbsp;and you need a lower dose you will normally start on a dose of 250 micrograms twice a day. This dose may be slowly increased if needed and if you don’t get any side effects. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your doctor or&nbsp;pharmacist&nbsp;if you are taking any of the following medicines, as the effect of Alprazolam may be stronger when taken at the same time: any other medicines to treat&nbsp; anxiety &nbsp;or&nbsp; depression &nbsp;or to help you sleep; some strong pain killers (e.g. morphine or codeine); antipsychotic medicines used to treat mental illnesses like&nbsp; schizophrenia; medicines to treat&nbsp; epilepsy; antihistamines for relief of&nbsp; allergies ; medicines for treating fungal infections (e.g. ketoconazole); oral contraceptives&nbsp;(‘the pill’); certain&nbsp; antibiotics&nbsp; (e.g.&nbsp; erythromycin ); cimetidine (for&nbsp;treating stomach ulcers); diltiazem (used for&nbsp; angina &nbsp;and&nbsp; high blood pressure ); ritonavir or other similar medicines used for treating&nbsp; HIV ; if you are going to have an operation where you will be given a general anaesthetic, tell your doctor or anaesthetist that you are taking Alprazolam. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines Alprazolam can cause side effects although not everyone gets them, and if you do get them they may differ in intensity for different people. Reasons for seeing your doctor immediately: Very occasionally treatment with Alprazolam can cause serious behavioural or psychiatric effects - for example agitation, restlessness, aggressiveness, irritability, violent anger, false beliefs, nightmares and hallucinations or other inappropriate behaviour. Sudden wheeziness, difficulty in swallowing or breathing, swelling of eyelids, face or lips, rash or itching (especially affecting the whole body). if you get any of these symptoms see your doctor straight away as treatment will need to be discontinued. Your doctor will then advise how treatment will be stopped. Reasons for seeing your doctor as soon as possible Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you get the following symptoms as your dose or treatment might need to be changed: memory loss (amnesia) or yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes ( jaundice ). Dependence and withdrawal symptoms: It is possible to become dependent on medicines like Alprazolam while you are taking them which increases the likelihood of getting withdrawal symptoms when you stop treatment. Withdrawal symptoms are more common if you: stop treatment suddenly have been taking high doses have been taking for long time have a history of alcohol or drug abuse. This can cause effects such as&nbsp; headaches, &nbsp;muscle pain,&nbsp; extreme anxiety , tension, restlessness, confusion, mood changes, difficulty sleeping and irritability. In severe cases of withdrawal you can also get the following symptoms: nausea (feeling sick), vomiting, sweating, stomach cramps, muscle cramps, a feeling of unreality or detachment, being unusually sensitive to sound, light or physical contact, numbness and tingling of the feet and hands, hallucinations (seeing or hearing things which are not there while you are awake), tremor or&nbsp; epileptic fits. &nbsp;Please tell your doctor if&nbsp;any withdrawal symptoms get worse or don’t go away. Other side effects that may occur are: Loss of alertness or concentration. Tiredness. Insomnia &nbsp;(inability to sleep or disturbed sleep). Sleepiness and unsteadiness (similar to feeling drunk) especially during the day. Light-headedness. Nervousness or&nbsp; feeling anxious . Confusion. Double or blurred vision. Increased pressure in the eyes, which can also affect your vision. Shakiness or trembling. Slurred speech. Stomach upsets. Loss of appetite or change in your weight. Muscle spasms or weakness. Jerky, uncoordinated movements. Headaches. Difficulty urinating or bladder control problems. Dizziness. Skin reactions. Problems with liver function&nbsp;(this shows up in blood tests). In women, irregular periods or production of too much prolactin (the hormone that stimulates milk production). Changes in your sex drive (men and women). Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Do not drink alcohol with this medicine. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Alprazolam may be harmful to the developing baby so you should not take Alprazolam if you are pregnant or planning to become pregnant. Tell your doctor immediately if you think you may be pregnant. Do not breast-feed while taking Alprazolam, as the drug may pass into breast milk. If you have any more questions please ask your pharmacist Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.patient.co.uk/leaflets/xanax.htm http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alprazolam http://www.drugs.com/xanax.html http://www.webmd.com/drugs/drug-9824-Xanax+Oral.aspx?drugid=9824&amp;drugname=Xanax+Oral http://www.rxlist.com/xanax-drug.htm http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Xanax.aspx Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Generalised Anxiety Disorder Xanax (Alprazolam) tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin