Wrinkles | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Wrinkles You are here: Home Wrinkles Wrinkles are a natural part of aging. As you grow older, your skin gets thinner, drier and less elastic. And it becomes less able to protect itself from damage. What is it? Wrinkles are a natural part of aging. As you grow older, your skin gets thinner, drier and less elastic. And it becomes less able to protect itself from damage. As a result, wrinkles, lines and creases form in your skin. Although genetics are the most important determiner of skin texture, a major contributor to wrinkles is spending too much time in the sun. Smoking also can cause premature aging of your skin. If your wrinkles are bothering you, you have more options than ever to help eliminate or at least diminish their appearance. Medications, skin resurfacing techniques, fillers, injectables and surgery top the list of effective wrinkle treatments. Symptoms Wrinkles are the lines and creases that form in your skin as you age. Some wrinkles can become deep crevices or furrows and may be especially noticeable around your eyes, mouth and neck. Causes Wrinkles are caused by a combination of factors — some you can control, others you can't: Age . As you get older, your skin naturally thins and becomes less elastic and more fragile. Decreased production of natural oils makes your skin drier and appear more wrinkled. Fat in the deeper layers of your skin, which gives the skin a plump appearance, starts to lessen. This causes loose, saggy skin and more pronounced lines and crevices. Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light . Ultraviolet radiation markedly speeds up the natural aging process and is the primary cause of early wrinkling. Exposure to UV light breaks down your skin's connective tissue — collagen and elastin fibres, which lie in the deeper layer of skin (dermis). Without the supportive connective tissue, your skin loses its strength and flexibility. As a result, skin begins to sag and wrinkle prematurely. Smoking . Smoking can accelerate the normal aging process of your skin, contributing to wrinkles. This may be due to changes in the blood supply to your skin. Repeated facial expressions . Facial movements and expressions, such as squinting or smiling, lead to fine lines and wrinkles. Each time you use a facial muscle, a groove forms beneath the surface of the skin. And as skin ages, it loses its flexibility and is no longer able to spring back in place. These grooves then become permanent features on your face. References http://www.medicinenet.com/wrinkles/article.htm http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/wrinkles/basics/definition/con-20029887 http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic_wrinkles https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/skin-care-and-aging Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin