Artelac, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Artelac You are here: Home Artelac Artelac eye drops contain the active ingredient hypromellose, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. What is it used for? Dry eye conditions. Moistening hard contact lenses and lubricating artificial eyes. How does it work? Artelac eye drops contain the active ingredient hypromellose, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. (NB. Hypromellose eye drops are also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine.) Hypromellose is a synthetic polymer that forms a film on the surface of the eye (cornea). It produces a transparent, lubricating and moistening film on the surface of the eye and is used as artificial tears. Hypromellose eye drops provide soothing relief from the symptoms of dry eyes, such as soreness, irritation or a gritty sensation. These may be caused by your eye not producing enough tears to keep the eye moist, or by things such as certain medical conditions or treatments, prolonged use of computer screens (where you tend to blink less and thus not lubricate the eyes sufficiently), or drying atmospheric conditions such as air-conditioning, central heating or atmospheric pollution. Artelac eye drops come in multi-dose bottles that contain a preservative and as single-dose units (SDUs) that are preservative-free. The SDUs can be used by people who wear rigid or gas permeable contact lenses, or who are sensitive to preservatives. Not to be used in Artelac multi-dose bottles contain the preservative benzalkonium chloride and are not suitable for people who wear soft contact lenses. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. Hypromellose is not absorbed into the body after application to the eye and is therefore unlikely to have any harmful effect when used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, as this has not been fully established, the manufacturer states that these drops should be used with caution by women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, and only on the advice of a doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. The following side effects are known to be associated with this medicine. Temporary blurred vision after putting the drops in. Mild stinging after putting the drops in. This list may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? If you are using any other medicines it is important to seek advice from your pharmacist before using this one as well, to make sure the combination is safe. If you are using more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least five minutes apart, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. Use eye gels or ointments last. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eyes/a6882/artelac-eye-drops-hypromellose/ http://www.artelac.co.uk https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/20112 https://www.drugs.com/uk/artelac-0-32-w-v-eye-drops-single-dose-unit-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Dry eyes Print This Page Health Reference Dry eyes Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin