Efexor XL, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Efexor XL Capsules You are here: Home Efexor XL Capsules Efexor XL (Venlafaxine) is a treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Why have I been prescribed Efexor XL? Efexor XL (Venlafaxine) is a&nbsp; treatment for adults with depression . Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. How does it work? Efexor XL increases the levels of serotonin and noradrenaline in the brain, which are known to be lowered in depression. When and how do I take it? Take Efexor XL at approximately the same time each day, in the morning and in the evening. Efexor should be&nbsp; taken with food . What’s the dose? The usual recommended starting dose is 75 mg per day in divided doses, two or three times a day. The dose can be raised by your doctor gradually and, if needed, even up to a maximum dose of 375 mg daily for depression. Could it interact with other tablets? Do not start or stop taking any medicines, including those bought without a prescription, natural and herbal remedies, before checking with your doctor or pharmacist. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs: see the section “Before you take Efexor XL”). Serotonin syndrome:&nbsp;Serotonin syndrome, a potentially life threatening condition (see the section “Possible Side Effects”), may occur with Efexor treatment, particularly when taken with other medicines. Examples of these medicines include: Triptans (used for migraine) Medicines to treat depression, for instance SNRI, SSRIs, tricyclics, or medicines containing lithium Medicines containing linezolid, an antibiotic (used to treat infections) Medicines containing moclobemide, a reversible MAOI (used to treat depression) Medicines containing sibutramine (used for weight loss) Medicines containing tramadol (a pain-killer) Products containing St. John’s Wort (also called Hypericum perforatum, a natural or herbal remedy used to treat mild depression) Products containing tryptophan (used for problems such as sleep and depression) Signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome may include a combination of the following: restlessness hallucinations loss of coordination fast heart beat increased body temperature fast changes in blood pressure overactive reflexes diarrhoea coma nausea vomiting Get medical care right away if you think serotonin syndrome is happening to you. The following medicines may also interact with Efexor XL and should be used with caution. It is especially important to mention to your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking medicines containing: Ketoconazole (an antifungal medicine) Haloperidol or risperidone (to treat psychiatric conditions) Metoprolol (a beta blocker to treat high blood pressure and heart problems) What are the possible risks or side-effects? Allergic reactions: If any of the following happen, do not take more Efexor XL. Tell your doctor immediately, or go to the casualty department at your nearest hospital: Chest tightness, wheezing, trouble swallowing or breathing Swelling of the face, throat, hands, or feet Feeling nervous or anxious , dizziness, throbbing sensations, sudden reddening of the skin and/or a warm feeling Severe rash, itching , or hives (elevated patches of red or pale skin that often itch) Serious side effects: If you notice any signs of the following, you may need urgent medical attention: Heart problems, such as fast or irregular heart rate, increased blood pressure Eye problems, such as blurred vision, dilated pupils Nerve problems, such as dizziness , pins and needles, movement disorder, seizures or fits Psychiatric problems, such as hyperactivity and euphoria Treatment withdrawal (see the section “HOW TO TAKE EFEXOR, XL If you stop taking Efexor XL”) Common side effects include: weight loss increased cholesteroldry mouth headache abnormal dreams decreased libido dizziness increased muscle tonus insomnia nervousness pins and needles sedation tremor confusion feeling separated (or detached) from yourself and reality blurred vision&nbsp; increase in blood pressure flushing palpitations yawning nausea appetite decreased constipation&nbsp; vomiting&nbsp; sweating (including night sweats) difficulties passing urine increased frequency in urination abnormal ejaculation/orgasm (males)&nbsp; lack of orgasm erectile dysfunction ( impotence ) menstrual irregularities such as increased bleeding or increased irregular bleeding weakness (asthenia) chills Can I drink alcohol while taking it? You should avoid alcohol while you are taking Efexor XL. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Efexor XL must only be administered to pregnant women if the expected benefits outweigh any possible risk. Efexor XL should not be taken during breast feed. A decision should be made with the doctor whether to continue/discontinue breastfeeding or continue/discontinue Efexor XL. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Treatment/Mental-Health-Medications/Venlafaxine-(Effexor) http://www.drugs.com/effexor.html http://www.rxlist.com/effexor-drug.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venlafaxine http://www.medicinenet.com/venlafaxine/article.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Depression Print This Page More Videos... What is Depression? Health Reference Depression Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin