Betoptic, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betoptic You are here: Home Betoptic Betoptic is used to treat glaucoma or ocular hypertension (high pressure in the eye) by reducing the fluid pressure in your eye(s). Why have I been prescribed Betoptic? Betoptic is used to treat glaucoma or ocular hypertension (high pressure in the eye) by reducing the fluid pressure in your eye(s). How does it work? Betoptic drops contain a drug called Betaxolol. It belongs to a group of medicines called Beta Blockers. It reduces the pressure in the eye by relaxing the vessels that bring blood to and from the area. When and how do I take it? Wash your hands before you start. Twist off the bottle cap. Hold the bottle pointing down, between your thumb and fingers. Tilt your head back. Pull down your lower eyelid with a finger, until there is a 'pocket' between the eyelid and your eye. The drop will go in&nbsp;here. Bring the bottle tip close to the eye. Do this in front of a mirror if it helps. Do not touch your eye or eyelid, surrounding areas or other surfaces with the dropper. It could infect the drops. Gently press on the base of the bottle to release one drop at a time. Do not squeeze the bottle, only a gentle press on the bottom is needed. Put the bottle cap firmly back on immediately after use. If a drop misses your eye, try again. What’s the dose? The usual dose is 1 drop in the affected eye(s) twice daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. BETOPTIC 0.5% may have effects on other medicines that you are also taking for heart disease or high blood pressure, such as other beta-blockers taken by mouth or reserpine and some medicines used to treat emotional, behavioural or mental disorders such as anxiety or depression . If you are using more than one type of eye drop, wait 15 minutes between using each one. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, BETOPTIC 0.5% can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. You may experience some or all of the following effects in your eye(s): Common (affect 1 to 10 people in 100): Stinging and burning, eye irritation, redness. Uncommon (affect 1 to 10 people in 1000): Itching , watery eyes, blurred vision, feeling of something in the eye, sensitivity to light. Rare (affect fewer than 1 in 1000 people): Dry eye(s) , drooping of the eyelid, loss of eyelashes. You may also experience effects in other areas of your body including: Slow heart beat shortness of breath wheezing sleeplessness headache depression hair loss muscular weakness muscular pain Because eye drops containing beta blockers can be absorbed into your bloodstream, undesirable effects found when beta blockers are taken by mouth or injection may also occur with the eye drops. These effects include: Abnormal heart beat low blood pressure heart failure numb or tingling sensations or leg pains (especially if you have a history of poor circulation) tiredness dizziness mental confusion hallucinations abnormal thinking impotence nightmares stomach upset nausea vomiting diarrhoea skin problems (especially rash) If any of the side effects get serious, or you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Betoptic. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? If you are pregnant or might get pregnant, or if you are breast-feeding a baby, talk to your doctor before you use Betoptic. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.google.ie/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&amp;ion=1&amp;espv=2&amp;ie=UTF-8#q=betoptic+wikapedia http://www.drugs.com/pro/betoptic.html http://www.drugs.com/sfx/betoptic-side-effects.html http://www.medicinenet.com/betaxolol_ophthalmic/article.htm http://www.rxlist.com/betoptic-s-drug.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin