Adenuric Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas. Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Adenuric You are here: Home Adenuric Adenuric tablets contain the active ingredient febuxostat, which is a type of medicine called a xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat is used to treat gout. What is Adenuric used for? Reducing high blood uric acid levels (hyperuricaemia) in gout and thus preventing gout attacks. How does Adenuric work? Adenuric tablets contain the active ingredient febuxostat, which is a type of medicine called a xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat is used to treat gout. Gout is caused by too much uric acid in the blood that leads to a build-up of uric acid crystals in the joints. It is these crystals that cause the characteristic pain and inflammation of gout. Uric acid is produced by an enzyme in the body called xanthine oxidase. Febuxostat inhibits the action of this enzyme and as a result lowers uric acid levels. By lowering the levels of uric acid in the blood, flare-ups of gout can be prevented. Adenuric tablets are used for the long term treatment and prevention of gout, but not for immediate treatment of gout flare-ups . Other medicines are used for the rapid relief of gout symptoms. Before taking Adenuric Some medicines are not suitable for people with certain conditions, and sometimes a medicine may only be used if extra care is taken. For these reasons, before you start taking febuxostat it is important that your doctor or pharmacist knows: If you are pregnant, trying for a baby or breast-feeding. If you have any problems with your heart, such as heart disease or heart failure . If you have any problems with your thyroid, liver or kidneys. If you have ever had an organ transplant. (This is because there is no experience of febuxostat in transplant patients.) If you are taking or using any other medicines. This includes any medicines you are taking which are available to buy without a prescription, such as herbal and complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to any medicine. How do I take Adenuric? Treatment with Adenuric should not be started during an acute attack of gout, as it could initially worsen the attack. It should not be started until the attack has completely subsided. When you first start treatment your doctor should normally prescribe you a suitable anti-inflammatory medicine , or colchicine, for at least the first six months of treatment, as febuxostat may cause an attack of gout in the early stages of treatment. If you do get a new attack of gout after you have started treatment with Adenuric you should keep taking it while the attack is treated with a suitable anti-inflammatory medicine . This is because the Adenuric will still be working to lower uric acid. Over time, your attacks will become less frequent and less painful as long as you continue to take the Adenuric every day. Adenuric tablets should be taken once a day, preferably at the same time each day. The tablets should be swallowed with a drink and can be taken either with or without food. If you forget to take a dose just take your next dose as usual. Don't take a double dose to make up for a missed dose. Use with caution in People with reduced kidney function . People with reduced liver function . People with an overactive or underactive thyroid gland . People taking theophylline . People with a history of allergic reactions to allopurinol (Zyloric) . Not to be used in Pregnancy. Breastfeeding. People taking the medicines mercaptopurine or azathioprine. People with heart failure or ischaemic heart disease , eg angina or a history of heart attack . There is insufficient information regarding the safety and effectiveness of this medicine in people who have had an organ transplant. It is not recommended for people who have had an organ transplant. This medicine is not recommended for people being treated for high uric acid levels as a result of cancer or Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (a rare inherited condition in which there is too much uric acid in the blood). There is insufficient information regarding the safety and effectiveness of this medicine in children. Adenuric tablets are not recommended for children or adolescents. Adenuric tablets contain lactose and are unsuitable for people with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption This medicine should not be used if you are allergic t o any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction , stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Headache. Diarrhoea. Nausea. Rash. Alteration in results of liver function tests. Gout flares. Excessive fluid retention in the body tissues, resulting in swelling (oedema). Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Dizziness. Sleepiness. Difficulty sleeping (insomnia) . Fatigue. Pins and needles or numb sensations. Reduced sense of smell. Changes in taste. Dry mouth . Disturbances of the gut such as vomiting, abdominal pain or bloating, indigestion, heartburn, constipation , flatulence (wind). Pain or inflammation in the joints. Muscle spasms, weakness, tightness or pain. Weakness on one side of the body. Skin reactions, such as dermatitis , hive-like rash, itching, skin discolouration. Decreased appetite. Increased weight . Increased levels of fats such as cholesterol or triglycerides in the blood (hyperlipidaemia). Diabetes. Kidney stones (nephrolithiasis). Kidney failure. Increased urine production, blood in the urine. Gallstones. High blood pressure. Irregular heartbeat (atrial fibrillation) or awareness of your heartbeat (palpitations). Chest pain. Hot flushes. Shortness of breath, cough. Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction . Increased levels of thyroid stimulating hormone. Rare (affect between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10,000 people) Blurred vision. Mouth ulcers. Hair loss. Excessive sweating. Feeling thirsty. Weight loss. Increased appetite or loss of appetite. Sensation of ringing or other noise in the ears (tinnitus). Nervousness. Severe allergic reactions , including anaphylaxis and severe skin reactions . Decreased numbers of platelets in the blood (thrombocytopenia). Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Jaundice or inflammation of the liver (hepatitis). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. Adenuric increases the effects of azathioprine and mercaptopurine. This medicine should not be used in combination with azathioprine or mercaptopurine. Adenuric may increase the blood level of theophylline . If you are taking theophylline your doctor should check your theophylline blood level after you start treatment with this medicine. How to store Adenuric Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/Febuxostat.htm http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/aches-and-pains/medicines/adenuric.html http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/000777/WC500021812.pdf http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/14607/SPC/Adenuric+film-coated+tablets/ http://www.nhs.uk/medicine-guides/pages/selectorshow.aspx?medicine=Adenuric http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Safetyinformation/DrugSafetyUpdate/CON155758 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin