Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Diprosalic Scalp Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Diprosalic Scalp Application You are here: Home Diprosalic Scalp Application Diprosalic scalp application contains two active ingredients, betamethasone dipropionate and salicylic acid. What is Diprosalic scalp application used for? Diprosalic scalp application is used to treat inflammatory and scaly skin disorders affecting the scalp, such as those listed below, when milder corticosteroids have not been effective. Psoriasis affecting the scalp. Eczema and dermatitis affecting the scalp. Seborrhoeic dermatitis affecting the scalp. How does Diprosalic scalp application work? Diprosalic scalp application contains two active ingredients, betamethasone dipropionate and salicylic acid. Betamethasone is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. Corticosteroids are medicines used for reducing inflammation. Inflammation of the skin happens as a result of allergy or irritation of the skin, and is caused by the release of various substances that are important in the immune system. These substances cause blood vessels to widen and result in the irritated area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful, such as is seen in dermatitis or eczema. When betamethasone is applied to the skin it works by acting inside the skin cells to decrease the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces swelling, redness and itch. Betamethasone is a potent corticosteroid that is applied to the skin to treat a wide variety of inflammatory skin diseases. Salicylic acid is type of medicine called a keratolytic. It works by breaking down keratin, which is a protein that forms part of the skin structure. In conditions such as psoriasis and chronic eczema, excessive amounts of keratin in the skin cells causes these cells to harden, and makes the skin become thickened and scaly. This not only makes the skin itchy and inflamed, but also reduces the degree to which anti-inflammatory medicines can penetrate through the skin to treat the inflammation. Salicylic acid breaks down the keratin in the hardened and thickened skin, helping to shed skin cells from the area to which it is applied, and soften and improve the appearance of scaly skin. It also helps improve the penetration of the betamethasone into the skin, making it more effective than if the betamethasone was applied on its own. The combination of betamethasone and salicyclic acid in this medicine is used to treat dry, scaly, inflammatory skin disorders such as eczema and psoriasis, where the thickened skin could otherwise prevent absorption of the corticosteroid. Diprosalic scalp application is thinner and easier to apply to the scalp than Diprosalic ointment. It is used to treat inflammatory and scaly disorders of the scalp. How do I use Diprosalic scalp application? Diprosalic scalp application should usually be applied thinly to the scalp twice a day (morning and night) to begin with. As soon as the condition starts to improve, you should use it less frequently, as directed by your doctor. A few drops of the lotion should be applied to the areas of the scalp that need treating and massaged in gently. The medicine will be left on the scalp - it should not be washed off. If you need to wash your hair you should wash and dry your hair before applying the scalp application. Take care to avoid the medicine running onto the face or into the eyes. Rinse with cold water if accidental contact occurs. Avoid applying the medicine to broken skin. Wash your hands after applying the scalp application to avoid accidentally transferring it to other areas. If there is no improvement in your scalp after two to four weeks of treatment you should consult your doctor. Repeat courses maybe necessary to control flare-ups of psoriasis or eczema, but should only be started on the advice of your doctor. Important information about Diprosalic scalp application This medicine is for external use on the scalp only. It must not be used on the face or any other part of the body apart from the scalp. Apply the medicine thinly to the affected areas of the scalp. If corticosteroids are used long-term, on large areas of skin, raw skin, skin folds, or under airtight dressings they are absorbed into the body more. This increases the risk of local side effects such as skin thinning, and those on other parts of the body, such as a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands. For this reason, continuous, long-term use of this medicine should be avoided wherever possible, particularly in children and on large areas of skin. You should not use airtight dressings with this medicine. If there is no improvement in your skin after two weeks of treatment you should consult your doctor. If used in children, wherever possible this medicine should not be used for longer than five days. You should not use airtight dressings to cover the area treated. Children being treated with this medicine should be reviewed by the doctor at least once a week. If you think the area of skin you are treating has become infected you should stop using this medicine and consult your doctor. Diprosalic scalp application should be used with caution in Children. Psoriasis. If you have been prescribed this medicine to treat scalp psoriasis you should have regular check-ups with your doctor. This is because although corticosteroids may be useful for psoriasis in the short-term, they can sometimes make psoriasis worse, and may cause the condition to relapse into generalised pustular psoriasis after the treatment is stopped. Diprosalic scalp application should not be used in Skin infected with bacteria, such as impetigo. Skin infected with fungi, such as thrush, ringworm, athlete's foot. Skin infected with viruses, such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores or herpes simplex. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding This medicine should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. Possible side effects of Diprosalic scalp application Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. The following side effects are known to be associated with this medicine. Skin irritation at site of application, such as burning, itching and redness. Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Drying of the skin. (Stop using this medicine and consult your doctor if it is making your skin very dry or or irritated.) Thinning of the skin. Changes in skin pigmentation. Stretch marks (striae). Slight widening of the veins in the skin. Excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis). Prolonged use of this medicine on extensive areas of skin, broken or raw skin, skin folds or underneath airtight dressings may on rare occasions result in enough corticosteroid being absorbed to have side effects on other parts of the body, for example a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands. How can Diprosalic scalp application affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you are using other medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. References: https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8422/diprosalic-scalp-application-betamethasone-salicylic-acid/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1450/pil https://chealth.canoe.com/drug/getdrug/diprosalic https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2141458.PA1286_029_002.3a4049fa-53f3-4f18-a9a3-c2a8e6383c64.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved.pdf.140219.pdf http://www.papaa.org/combination-therapies/diprosalic https://dtb.bmj.com/content/24/20/79 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis , Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) , Eczema Print This Page Health Reference Psoriasis Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Eczema Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin