Elantan LA, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Elantan LA You are here: Home Elantan LA This medicine is used to prevent angina pectoris. Why have I been prescribed Elantan LA? This medicine is used to prevent angina pectoris . How does it work? This medicine is one of a group of medicines called “Nitrates”. Nitrates are used to dilate (widen) your blood vessels to allow an increased amount of blood to flow to areas which need it. When and how do I take it? Follow your doctor’s directions about when and how to take your medicine. If you do not take these capsules as directed, the capsules may become less&nbsp;effective. Read the label. If you are not sure about anything, ask your pharmacist. To remove the capsule from the packaging, carefully push one of the ends of&nbsp;the capsule through the foil. If you push in the middle you may damage the capsule. Swallow the capsules whole, with a drink of water. What’s the dose? The usual adult dose is one or two capsules to be taken in the morning . Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your doctor if: You are taking medicines which reduce blood pressure (e.g. beta-blockers, calcium&nbsp;channel blockers, vasodilators, alprostadil, aldesleukin, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, ACE inhibitors) You take tricyclic antidepressants (used to treat depression ) You take neuroleptics (used to treat anxiety ) You are taking dihydroergotamine (used to treat migraine ) Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? This medicine may cause side-effects in some people: You might get headaches at the start of treatment. Usually they disappear after a few days. Dizziness , tiredness, (resulting from postural hypotension which occurs when your blood pressure drops upon standing) and flushing may also occur for the first few days of treatment. Rarely, people can experience nausea, vomiting or allergic rashes. Uncommonly you may experience nausea, vomiting, pallor, excessive perspiration&nbsp;or worsened angina due to very low blood pressure. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? The effects of the medicine may be increased to dangerous levels by drinking alcohol. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? If you are pregnant or breastfeeding, please ensure that you ask your doctor for advice before using this medicine. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.drugs.com/uk/elantan-la-50-capsules-50mg-leaflet.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/6107 http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/heart-and-blood/a6644/elantan-la-isosorbide-mononitrate/ http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2111078.PA0891_011_002.d1161414-d941-4613-8e53-58c5fcc93f09.000001elantan%20LA%2050mg%20clean%20PL.130926.pdf Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin