Bactroban, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Bactroban Nasal You are here: Home Bactroban Nasal Bactroban nasal ointment contains the active ingredient mupirocin, which is an antibacterial medicine. It is used to eliminate staphylococcal bacteria from the nasal passages. In particular, it is usually reserved for eradicating methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteria from the nasal passages of hospital inpatients. What is it used for? Eradicating staphylococcal bacteria, in particular MRSA, from the nostrils in order to prevent infections. How does it work? Bactroban nasal ointment contains the active ingredient mupirocin, which is an antibacterial medicine. It is used to eliminate staphylococcal bacteria from the nasal passages. In particular, it is usually reserved for eradicating methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteria from the nasal passages of hospital inpatients. Certain bacteria, including MRSA, are found naturally on many people's skin and inside their nose. These bacteria are usually harmless and don't cause any problems. However, they can cause infection if they get into a wound or spread to other parts of the body. In a hospital environment it is important that these types of bacteria are eliminated, because they can not only cause infections in the carrier, but can also be spread to other people and potentially cause serious infections in people who are sick and vulnerable. Bactroban nasal ointment is applied inside the nose for this purpose. The mupirocin works by affecting the bacteria's production of certain proteins that are necessary for their survival. It causes the bacteria to produce abnormal and faulty proteins. This ultimately kills the bacteria. How do I use it? Bactroban nasal ointment should be applied inside the nostrils twice a day for at least five days. Follow the instructions given by your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. A small amount of the ointment (about the size of a match head) should be placed on the little finger and applied to the inside of each nostril. The nostrils should then closed by pressing the sides of the nose together to spread the ointment around the nostrils. A cotton bud may be used instead of the little finger for applying the ointment to infants or patients who are very ill. Wash your hands after applying the ointment. A swab will be taken from the nose two days after completing this treatment to confirm that the bacteria have been eradicated. The course may be repeated if this sample is positive (and the throat is not colonised). To avoid the bacteria developing resistance to mupirocin, the treatment course should not exceed seven days and the course should not be repeated on more than one occasion. Warning! Avoid getting the ointment in contact with the eyes. If it gets in the eyes they should be thoroughly rinsed with plenty of water. Not to be used in People with known sensitivity or allergy to any ingredient. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy has not been fully established. The manufacturer therefore advises that it should only be used during pregnancy if the potential benefits outweigh any risks to the developing baby. However, since very little of the medicine is absorbed into the bloodstream from the nasal lining it is likely to be low risk to a developing baby. Seek further medical advice from your doctor if you are or think you could be pregnant. There is limited information available about the safety of this medicine during breastfeeding. However, it is likely to be low risk to a nursing infant because very little of the medicine is absorbed into the mother's bloodstream from the nasal lining. Seek further medical advice from your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Itching, redness, burning, tingling or stinging sensation in the nose. Very rare (affect fewer than 1 in 10,000 people) Skin irritation or allergic reaction. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, other nasal products (eg nasal drops or sprays) should not be applied at the same time as the ointment, as they could dilute it and make the antibiotic less effective. References: http://patient.info/medicine/mupirocin-nasal-ointment-bactroban-nasal-ointment https://www.drugs.com/cdi/bactroban-nasal-ointment.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/ear-nose-and-throat/a6263/bactroban-nasal-ointment-mupirocin/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/2027 &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : MRSA infections Print This Page Health Reference MRSA infections Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin