Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Desunin Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Desunin (colecalciferol) You are here: Home Desunin (colecalciferol) Desunin tablets contain the active ingredient colecalciferol, which is also known as vitamin D3. Each tablet contains 800 IU colecalciferol, which is equivalent to 20 micrograms vitamin D3. What is it used for? Prevention and treatment of vitamin D deficiency in adults and adolescents over 12 years of age. How does it work? Desunin tablets contain the active ingredient colecalciferol, which is also known as vitamin D3. Each tablet contains 800 IU colecalciferol, which is equivalent to 20 micrograms vitamin D3. Vitamin D is normally obtained primarily from sunlight acting on the skin. It is also consumed in the diet in oily fish and dairy products. Vitamin D deficiency develops when there is inadequate exposure to sunlight, such as in elderly people with reduced mobility or who are housebound, people who cover their skin when outdoors, or when there is a lack of the vitamin in the diet. Vitamin D is needed for calcium to be absorbed from the gut, and deficiency can lead to low calcium levels and subsequent weakening of bones. This is known as osteomalacia. Vitamin D supplements correct vitamin D deficiency and improve calcium absorption from the gut. Vitamin D may be given in combination with calcium to treat osteomalacia and osteoporosis. Increasing vitamin D and calcium in the body helps to strengthen the bones. How do I take it? Desunin tablets can be taken either with or without food. The tablets should be swallowed with a drink of water. They may also be crushed. Desunin tablets are usually taken once daily. The number of tablets to be taken each day will vary from person to person and depends on the severity of vitamin D deficiency. It is important to follow the instructions given by your doctor. These will be printed on the dispensing label that your pharmacist has put on the medicine. Use with caution in People with mild or moderately decreased kidney function. People with a history of kidney stones People taking digoxin or thiazide diuretics such as bendroflumethiazide. Sarcoidosis. Not to be used in Children under 12 years of age. People with a high level of calcium in their blood (hypercalcaemia), for example as a result of bone marrow cancer, cancer that has spread to the bones, sarcoidosis or overactivity of the parathyroid glands (hyperparathyroidism). People with very high levels of calcium in their urine (hypercalciuria). People who currently have kidney stones (nephrolithiasis). People with severely decreased kidney function. People with vitamin D poisoning. People with rare hereditary problems of fructose intolerance, glucose-galactose malabsorption or sucrase-isomaltase insufficiency (Desunin tablets contain sucrose and isomalt). This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine is safe to take during pregnancy to treat an established vitamin D deficiency. It is important to let your doctor know if you are pregnant and to follow the instructions given by your doctor for how many tablets to take each day. You should not take other vitamin D supplements in combination with this one. Pregnant and breastfeeding women who don’t have an established vitamin D deficiency should not take this medicine to prevent vitamin D deficiency, as the dose of vitamin D in Desunin tablets is too high for this purpose. It is recommended that women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should take a daily vitamin D supplement containing 10 micrograms of vitamin D to prevent vitamin D deficiency. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice on suitable products. Vitamin D passes into breast milk. This medicine is safe for mothers who are breastfeeding to take to treat an established vitamin D deficiency. However, if you have been prescribed a particularly high dose your doctor may want to monitor the nursing infant’s calcium levels. You should not take other vitamin D supplements in combination with this one. You should also talk to your doctor before giving any vitamin D supplements to your baby, as they may be getting enough from your milk. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Uncommon&nbsp; High blood calcium level (hypercalcaemia). High calcium levels in the urine. Rare&nbsp; Skin rash. Itching. Hives. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while having treatment with this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. You should not take other calcium or vitamin D supplements (including those found in multivitamins) in combination with this medicine, unless these have been specifically prescribed by your doctor. Thiazide diuretics, such as bendroflumethiazide, reduce the amount of calcium excreted in the urine, and this can increase the amount of calcium in the blood. If you are taking a thiazide diuretic in combination with this medicine you should have regular blood tests to monitor the level of calcium in your blood. People taking digoxin or other cardiac glycosides may have an increased risk of abnormal heart rhythms if they experience abnormally high blood calcium levels while taking this medicine. The following medicines may decrease the absorption of colecalciferol from the gut and should not be taken at the same time of day as this medicine: colestipol colestyramine orlistat. If you are taking any of the following medicines you may need a larger than normal dose of this medicine. Ask your doctor for advice: carbamazepine corticosteroids such as prednisolone phenobarbital phenytoin. References: https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/4304/pil https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2175013.PA1332_044_001.a2c6ed14-eb2a-406a-9bbb-8cf202e4e3d8.000001Product%20Leaflet.160711.pdf https://patient.info/forums/discuss/i-have-been-prescribed-desunin-800ui-tablets-528867 http://www.desunin.co.uk/about-desuninr/ http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/diet-and-nutrition/a8825/desunin-colecalciferol/ &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin