Dothep, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dothep You are here: Home Dothep Dothep (Dosulepin), an antidepressant or mood elevator, is used to treat depression and anxiety. Why have I been prescribed Dothep? Dothep (Dosulepin), an antidepressant or mood elevator, is used to treat depression and anxiety . How does it work? Dothep is thought to increase the levels of two chemicals (noradrenaline and serotonin) in the brain which are known to be decreased in depression. When and how do I take it? Dothep is taken between once to three times a day depending on what dose you are on. Preferably taken after meals . Do not skip doses or take less of the medication than your doctor has prescribed. What’s the dose? The usual dose for an adult is 1 or 2 capsules three times a day of the 25mg strength. Or 1 or 2 capsules daily of the 75 mg strength. Could it interact with other tablets? Dothep 25mg capsules may interact with anti-hypertensive drugs (for high blood pressure ) and so reduce their effectiveness. Barbiturates (used in epilepsy ) may cause lower blood levels of Dothep and methylphenidate (used in attention deficit hyperactive disorder- ADHD ) may cause higher blood levels of Dothep. The dose of antidepressant may need to be adjusted by your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Dothep 25mg capsules may cause some unpleasant effects in certain people: drowsiness weakness tiredness excitement insomnia dry mouth constipation sweating difficulty urinating blurred vision Contact your doctor if these effects are persistent or severe. If you develop skin rash, fever, slow speech, difficulty swallowing, yellowing of the skin - stop taking the capsules and contact your doctor immediately. If you are depressed and/or have anxiety disorder you can sometimes have thoughts of harming or killing yourself. These may be increased when first starting antidepressants, since these medications all take time to work, usually about two weeks but sometimes longer. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by Dothep. You should talk to your doctor first. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Dothep should not be used in pregnancy, particularly in the first trimester, unless your doctor deems it absolutely necessary. It should not be used while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.medicines.org.au/files/afpdothe.pdf http://www.nps.org.au/medicines/brain-and-nervous-system/antidepressant-medicines/dothiepin/for-individuals/dothiepin-brands/dothep-capsules http://www.drugs.com/answers/alternative-for-dothep-due-to-side-effects-167370.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dosulepin &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Depression , Anxiety Print This Page Health Reference Depression Anxiety Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin