Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Pacemaker Panadol (OTC) Para... Panadol Extra (OTC... Pantium - (Pantopr... Pantoflux - (Panto... Pantoloc - (Pantop... Pantoprazole Pantup - (Pantopra... Paracetamol Paracodin Tablets/... Paralink Supposito... Paramax (paracetam... Paramol Tablets Paratabs (OTC) Par... Pariet Paroser - (Paroxet... Penicillin Pentasa - (Mesalaz... Pepcid (Famotidine... Peppermint Periactin Tablets Phenergan Tablets/... Phenobarbitone-(ph... Phyllocontin-Conti... Phytoestrogens Picolax sachets Pinaclav Tablets/S... Pinaclor - (Cefacl... Pinamox - Amoxycil... Pinamox Suspension Pioglitazone Table... Piriton - (Chlorph... Pizotifen Tablets Plaquenil Tablets Plavix Tablets - (... Polyfax Ointment Ponstan Capsules -... Pradaxa Pravamel - (Pravas... Pravastatin Pravat - (Pravasta... Pravitin - (Pravas... Pred Mild 0.12% Dr... Pred-Forte Drops Predfoam Prednesol 5mg Disp... Prednisolone Table... Pregabalin Capsule... Pregnyl Injection Premarin Premia 0.30mg/1.5m... Premique 0.625mg/5... Prempak-C Priadel Tablets Primolut N (noreth... Probiotics Procoralan (ivabra... Proctosedyl Ointme... Profloxin - (Cipro... Progestogen-only C... Prograf (Tacrolimu... Prolia (denosumab)... Propylthiouracil Proscar Tablets -... Prostap Injection Prothiaden Tablets... Protium Proton Pump Inhibi... Protopic Ointment Provera tablets (m... Provigil Prozac - (Fluoxeti... Prozit (Fluoxetine... Psyllium Husk Caps... Pulmicort Inhaler Pulmicort Respules Pulmicort Turbohal... Pumpkin Seeds Puregon Injection Pyridoxine Tablets Medicine - P Pacemaker A pacemaker is a small device, about the size of a pocket watch, that's placed under the skin near your heart to help control your heartbeat. Panadol (OTC) Paracetamol Paracetamol is a mild pain killer and anti-pyretic (reduces temperature). The tablets are recommended for use in the short-term management of headaches, including migraine and tension headaches, backache, rheumatic and muscle pain, period pains, nerve pains, toothache and for relieving fever. Panadol Extra (OTC) Panadol extra products contain the painkiller paracetamol in combination with caffeine - read on for advice on their use, warnings and side effects. Pantium - (Pantoprazole) Pantium is a generic brand of Protium. Pantium is used to treat certain conditions caused by too much acid being produced in the stomach. Pantoflux - (Pantoprazole) Pantoflux is a generic brand of Protium. Pantoflux is used to treat certain conditions caused by too much acid being produced in the stomach. Pantoloc - (Pantoprazole) Pantoloc is a generic brand of Protium. Pantoloc is used to treat certain conditions caused by too much acid being produced in the stomach. Pantoprazole Pantoprazole is a generic brand of Protium. Pantoprazole is used to treat certain conditions caused by too much acid being produced in the stomach. Pantup - (Pantoprazole) Pantup is a generic brand of Protium. Pantup is used to treat certain conditions caused by too much acid being produced in the stomach. Paracetamol Paracetamol is a mild pain killer and anti-pyretic (reduces temperature). The tablets are recommended for use in the short-term management of headaches, including migraine and tension headaches, backache, rheumatic and muscle pain, period pains, nerve pains, toothache and for relieving fever. Paracodin Tablets/Syrup/Drops Paracodin tablets contain the active ingredient dihydrocodeine, which is a type of medicine called an opioid painkiller.&nbsp; Paralink Suppositories 180mg (OTC) Treatment of mild to moderate pain and fever in babies and children ≥3 months especially when oral administration is not appropriate e.g. post-operative pain or patients with nausea and/or vomiting. Paramax (paracetamol and metoclopramide) Paramax tablets and sachets contain two active ingredients, paracetamol and metoclopramide. Paracetamol is a painkiller and metoclopramide is an antisickness medicine. Paramol Tablets Paramol tablets contain two active ingredients, paracetamol and dihydrocodeine, also known as co-dydramol.&nbsp; Paratabs (OTC) Paracetamol Paracetamol is a mild pain killer and anti-pyretic (reduces temperature). The tablets are recommended for use in the short-term management of headaches, including migraine and tension headaches, backache, rheumatic and muscle pain, period pains, nerve pains, toothache and for relieving fever. Pariet Pariet tablets contain the active ingredient rabeprazole, which is a type of medicine called a proton pump inhibitor. Rabeprazole is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Rabeprazole acts in the stomach to decrease the production of stomach acid. Paroser - (Paroxetine) Paroser (Paroxetine) is a treatment for adults with depression and/or anxiety disorders. The anxiety disorders that ‘PAROSER’ is used to treat are: obsessive compulsive disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, post traumatic stress disorder and generalised anxiety disorder. Penicillin Penicillins are a certain collection of antibiotics that eliminate infection causing bacteria. Also known in short as pen or PCN, they originate from a type of fungi called Penicillium fungi. Pentasa - (Mesalazine) Pentasa (Mesalazine) reduces inflammation in ulcerative colitis. It may be used during a flare up or after a flare up to help prevent further attacks from happening. Pepcid (Famotidine) Tablets Famotidine is a type of medicine called an H2 receptor antagonist. It acts in the stomach to decrease the production of stomach acid. Peppermint Peppermint (Mentha piperita) oil has been shown to have antispasmodic effects and may improve irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) symptoms such as cramping and bloating. Several clinical trials have used enteric-coated peppermint oil in IBS or recurrent abdominal pain in children. Significant..... Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin