Pinched nerve | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Pinched nerve You are here: Home Pinched nerve A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues — such as bones, cartilage, muscles or tendons. This pressure disrupts the nerve&#039;s function, causing pain, tingling, numbness or weakness. What is it? A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues — such as bones, cartilage, muscles or tendons. This pressure disrupts the nerve's function, causing pain, tingling, numbness or weakness. A pinched nerve can occur anywhere in your body. A herniated disk in your lower spine, for example, may put pressure on a nerve root, causing pain that radiates down the back of your leg (sciatica). Likewise, a pinched nerve in your wrist can lead to pain and numbness in your hand and fingers (carpal tunnel syndrome). With rest and other conservative treatments, most people recover from the effects of a pinched nerve within a few days or weeks. Sometimes, surgery is necessary to relieve pain from a pinched nerve. Symptoms Pinched nerve signs and symptoms include: Numbness or decreased sensation in the area supplied by the nerve. Sharp or burning pain, which may radiate outward. When the pinched nerve comes from the spinal cord, coughing or sneezing may aggravate the pain. Tingling, "pins and needles" sensations (paresthesia). Muscle weakness or twitching in the affected area. Frequent feeling that a foot or hand has "fallen asleep." The problems related to a pinched nerve may be worse when you're sleeping. Causes A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure (compression) is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues. In some cases, this tissue might be bone or cartilage — such as in the case of a herniated spinal disk that compresses a nerve root. In other cases, muscle or tendons may be the culprits. In the case of carpal tunnel syndrome, a variety of tissues may be responsible for compression of the carpal tunnel's median nerve, including swollen tendon sheaths within the tunnel, enlarged bone that narrows the tunnel, or a thickened and degenerated ligament. A number of conditions may cause tissue to compress a nerve or nerves. Injury, poor posture, osteoarthritis, stress from repetitive job, hobby or sports activities, and obesity are common causes of nerve pressure. This pressure causes inflammation of the nerve and disrupts the nerve's function. If a nerve is pinched for only a short time, there's typically no permanent damage. Once the pressure is relieved, nerve function returns to normal. However, if the pressure continues, chronic pain and permanent nerve damage can occur. Risk factors The following factors may increase your risk of experiencing a pinched nerve: Posture . Poor posture adds pressure to your spine and nerves. Osteoarthritis . Nerves can become pinched in the bone spurs caused by osteoarthritis. Overuse . Jobs or hobbies that require repetitive hand, wrist or shoulder movements, such as assembly line work, increase your likelihood of a pinched nerve. Obesity . Excess weight can add pressure to nerves. Heredity . Some people appear to be genetically predisposed to conditions that lead to pinched nerves. Diagnosis Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and conduct a physical examination. If your doctor suspects a pinched nerve, you may undergo some tests. These tests are often completed at the same time and take about one hour: Nerve conduction study . Patch-style electrodes are placed on your skin to stimulate the nerve with a mild electrical impulse. You'll feel a sensation like an electric shock, which may be uncomfortable. Test results tell your doctor whether you have a damaged nerve. This test may also be called a nerve conduction velocity test. Electromyography . This test measures the electrical discharges produced in muscles. During the test, a thin needle electrode is placed into the muscle to record electrical activity. You will be asked to rest and contract the muscle, such as by bending your arm. You may feel pain when the needle is inserted, and your muscle may be sore for a few days after the test. Test results tell your doctor if there's damage to the nerves leading to the muscle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . MRI, a technique that uses a magnetic field and radio waves to create cross-sectional images of your body, may be used if your doctor suspects you have nerve root compression in your spine. References http://www.medicinenet.com/pinched_nerve_overview/article.htm http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/pinched-nerve/basics/symptoms/con-20029601 http://www.healthline.com/health/pinched-nerve-shoulder-pain http://www.webmd.com/pain-management/guide/compressed-nerves Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin