Hiccups | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Hiccups You are here: Home Hiccups Hiccups are a common condition that affects nearly everyone. Hiccups involve the involuntary contraction of the diaphragm — the muscle that separates your chest from your abdomen and plays an important role in breathing. What is it? Hiccups are a common condition that affects nearly everyone. Hiccups involve the involuntary contraction of the diaphragm — the muscle that separates your chest from your abdomen and plays an important role in breathing. Each contraction is followed by a sudden closure of your vocal cords, which produces the characteristic "hic" sound. Many people have home remedies for hiccups that they swear by, ranging from breathing into a paper bag to swallowing a teaspoon of granulated sugar. Hiccups may result from a large meal, alcoholic beverages or sudden excitement. Rarely, hiccups may be a sign of an underlying medical condition. A bout of hiccups usually lasts only a few minutes. But in some people, about one in 100,000, hiccups may persist for months. This can result in malnutrition and exhaustion. Symptoms The characteristic sound of a hiccup, sometimes preceded by a slight tightening sensation in your chest, abdomen or throat, are the only signs and symptoms associated with hiccups. The number of hiccups a minute typically ranges between four and 60. Causes The most common triggers for short-term hiccups include: Eating too much Drinking carbonated beverages Excessive consumption of alcohol Sudden temperature changes Excitement or emotional stress Hiccups that last more than 48 hours may be caused by a variety of factors, which are generally grouped into the following categories: Nerve damage or irritation The most common cause of long-term hiccups is damage or irritation of the vagus nerves or phrenic nerves, which serve the diaphragm muscle. Factors that may cause damage or irritation to these nerves include: A hair or something else in your ear touching your eardrum Sore throat or laryngitis A tumor, cyst or goiter in your neck Gastroesophageal reflux Central nervous system disorders A tumor or infection in your central nervous system or damage to your central nervous system as a result of trauma can disrupt your body's normal control of the hiccup reflex. Examples include: Stroke Multiple sclerosis Tumors Meningitis Encephalitis Traumatic brain injury Metabolic disorders and drugs Alcoholism Anesthesia Barbiturates Diabetes Electrolyte imbalance Kidney failure Steroids Tranquilizers&nbsp; Risk factors Sex Men are much more likely to develop long-term hiccups than are women. Surgery Several factors related to surgical procedures appear to increase your risk of developing long-term hiccups. They include: General anesthesia Intubation, in which a tube is placed down your throat to help you breathe Neck extension, which is necessary during intubation Abdominal distension, which is common after endoscopic procedures performed through small incisions Organ manipulation Mental or emotional issues Anxiety, stress and excitement have been associated with some cases of short-term and long-term hiccups.&nbsp; Complications Prolonged hiccups may interfere with: Speech Eating Sleeping Post-surgical wound healing Diagnosis If your doctor suspects an underlying medical condition may be causing your hiccups, he or she may recommend one or more of the following tests: Laboratory tests Samples of your blood may be checked for signs of: Infection Diabetes Kidney disease Imaging tests These types of tests may be able to detect anatomical abnormalities that may be affecting the vagus nerve, phrenic nerve or diaphragm. Imaging tests may include: Chest X-ray Computerized tomography (CT) scan Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Endoscopic tests These procedures utilize a thin, flexible tube containing a tiny camera, which is passed down your throat to check for problems in your esophagus or windpipe.&nbsp; References: http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Hiccup/Pages/Treatment.aspx http://www.medicinenet.com/hiccups/article.htm http://www.emedicinehealth.com/hiccups/article_em.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hiccup &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin