Paranoid schizophrenia | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Paranoid schizophrenia You are here: Home Paranoid schizophrenia Paranoid schizophrenia is one of several types of schizophrenia, a chronic mental illness in which reality is interpreted abnormally (psychosis). The classic features of paranoid schizophrenia are having beliefs that have no basis in reality (delusions) and hearing things that aren&#039;t real. What is it? Paranoid schizophrenia is one of several types of schizophrenia, a chronic mental illness in which reality is interpreted abnormally (psychosis). The classic features of paranoid schizophrenia are having beliefs that have no basis in reality (delusions) and hearing things that aren't real (auditory hallucinations). With paranoid schizophrenia, your ability to think and function in daily life may be better than with other types of schizophrenia. You may not have as many problems with memory, concentration or dulled emotions. Still, paranoid schizophrenia is a serious, lifelong condition that can lead to many complications, including suicidal behavior. But with effective treatment, you can manage the symptoms of paranoid schizophrenia and work toward leading a happier, healthier life. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of paranoid schizophrenia may include: Auditory hallucinations, such as hearing voices Delusions, such as believing a co-worker wants to poison you Anxiety Anger Aloofness Violence Verbal confrontations Patronizing manner Suicidal thoughts and behavior With paranoid schizophrenia, you're less likely to be affected by mood problems or problems with thinking, concentration and attention. Instead, you're most affected by what are known as positive symptoms. Causes It's not known what causes paranoid schizophrenia. However, a growing body of evidence suggests that paranoid schizophrenia and other forms of schizophrenia are caused by brain dysfunction. Why and how that brain dysfunction occurs is still under investigation, though. It's thought that an interaction of genetics and environment may lead to brain dysfunction that causes paranoid schizophrenia. Problems with certain naturally occurring brain chemicals called neurotransmitters may also contribute to paranoid schizophrenia. Imaging studies show differences in the brain structure of people with schizophrenia, but researchers aren't yet sure about the significance of these changes. Risk factors Although the precise cause of paranoid schizophrenia isn't known, researchers have identified certain factors that seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering paranoid schizophrenia, including: Having a family history of schizophrenia Exposure to viruses while in the womb Malnutrition while in the womb Stressful life circumstances Trauma or abuse during childhood Older paternal age Taking psychoactive drugs during adolescence According to the National Institute of Mental Health, schizophrenia affects about 1 percent of the general population, and paranoid schizophrenia affects an even smaller percentage. Schizophrenia typically becomes apparent between the teenage years and the mid-30s, but paranoid schizophrenia may start later in life. Complications Left untreated, paranoid schizophrenia can result in severe emotional, behavioral, health, and even legal and financial problems that affect every area of your life. Complications that paranoid schizophrenia may cause or be associated with include: Suicidal thoughts and behavior Self-destructive behavior Depression Abuse of alcohol, drugs or prescription medications Poverty Homelessness Incarceration Family conflicts Inability to work or attend school Health problems from antipsychotic medications Being a victim or perpetrator of violent crime Heart and lung disease related to smoking Diagnosis If your doctor believes you may have paranoid schizophrenia or another mental illness, he or she typically runs a series of medical and psychological tests and exams. These can help pinpoint a diagnosis, rule out other problems that could be causing your symptoms and check for any related complications. These exams and tests generally include: Physical exam . This may include measuring height and weight, checking vital signs, such as heart rate, blood pressure and temperature, listening to your heart and lungs, and examining your abdomen. Laboratory tests . These may include a complete blood count (CBC), screening for alcohol and drugs, and a check of your thyroid function. Psychological evaluation . A doctor or mental health provider will talk to you about your thoughts, feelings and behavior patterns. He or she will ask about your symptoms, including when they started, how severe they are, how they affect your daily life and whether you've had similar episodes in the past. You'll also discuss any thoughts you may have of suicide, self-harm or harming others. Your doctor may also want to talk to family or friends, if possible. Diagnostic criteria for paranoid schizophrenia To be diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia, you must meet the symptom criteria. Diagnostic criteria for paranoid schizophrenia include: A preoccupation with one or more delusions Frequent auditory hallucinations It can sometimes be difficult to diagnose paranoid schizophrenia, especially because other conditions may have similar symptoms. Be sure to stick with it, though, so that you can get appropriate treatment. References http://psychcentral.com/lib/paranoid-schizophrenia/ http://www.healthyplace.com/thought-disorders/schizophrenia-information/what-is-paranoid-schizophrenia-symptoms-causes-treatments/ http://www.bmj.com/content/333/7569/636 http://thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01121-6/fulltext Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Dolmatil Tablets (Sulpiride) Medicine Reference Risperidone - (Risperdal) Zyprexa - (Olanzapine) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin