Multiple sclerosis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Multiple sclerosis You are here: Home Multiple sclerosis In this article, I detail what Multiple Sclerosis is, the causes of Multiple Sclerosis, current treatments for Multiple Sclerosis and the latest management strategies for Multiple Sclerosis. What is it? Ultimately, this may result in deterioration of the nerves themselves, a process that's not reversible. Although Multiple Sclerosis can occur at any age, it most often begins in people between the ages of 20 and 40. Women are more likely to develop Multiple Sclerosis than are men. How do I recognise it? Multiple Sclerosis signs and symptoms may include: Numbness or weakness in one or more limbs, which typically occurs on one side of your body at a time or the bottom half of your body Partial or complete loss of vision, usually in one eye at a time, often with pain during eye movement (optic neuritis) Double vision or blurring of vision Tingling or pain in parts of your body Electric-shock sensations that occur with certain head movements Tremor, lack of coordination or unsteady gait Fatigue Dizziness Most people with Multiple Sclerosis, particularly in the beginning stages of the disease, experience relapses of symptoms, which are followed by periods of complete or partial remission. Signs and symptoms of Multiple Sclerosis often are triggered or worsened by an increase in body temperature. Causes Multiple Sclerosis is an autoimmune disease, where the body's immune system attacks its own tissues. In Multiple Sclerosis, this process destroys myelin — the fatty substance that coats and protects nerve fibers in the brain and spinal cord. How do you treat it? Like any disease, even if there is no cure, there is almost always something you can do to manage it and take control. There are three main areas involved in the treatment of any disease: Conventional medicines Complementary medicines Complementary therapies For information on medicines and therapies relevant to Multiple Sclerosis, make an appointment at Lynch's Pharmacy, Broadale, Douglas, Cork on 021-4366923. Learn all about the drugs used to treat the disease and any c omplementary medicines or therapies proven to help. Equip yourself with the tools to manage the condition and not be managed by it. How do you live with it? Certain adjustments may be needed to get on with your life, and often, some simple tips and advice can go a long way to making these changes.&nbsp; When you come to a Lynch's Pharmacy Clinic, we give you all the necessary information available to make your life more manageable and allow you to better live with your condition. References Multiple sclerosis- http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_sclerosis http://www.webmd.com/multiple-sclerosis/guide/multiple-sclerosis-symptoms http://www.patient.co.uk/doctor/multiple-sclerosis Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Copaxone Betaferon (Interferon) Avonex (Interferon Beta) Medicine Reference Avonex (Interferon Beta) Betaferon Copaxone Injection Rebif Injection Tysabri - (Natalizumab) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin