Daktarin Oral gel, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Daktarin Oral Gel You are here: Home Daktarin Oral Gel Daktarin oral gel is prescribed to prevent and treat fungal infections of the mouth, throat, stomach or intestines. What is Daktarin oral gel used for? Daktarin oral gel is prescribed to prevent and treat fungal infections of the mouth, throat, stomach or intestines. Daktarin oral gel can also be bought from pharmacies without a prescription, but only for treating and preventing fungal infections of the mouth and throat, such as oral thrush. The gel can be used to treat adults, children and infants aged four months and older. How does Daktarin oral gel work? Daktarin oral gel contains the active ingredient miconazole. This antifungal medicine kills fungi and yeasts by causing holes to appear in their cell membranes. The cell membranes of fungi are vital for their survival. They keep unwanted substances from entering the cells and stop the contents of the cells from leaking out. By making holes in the membranes, miconazole allows essential constituents of the fungal cells to leak out, which kills the fungi and clears up the infection. Miconazole also has some antibacterial action and kills certain bacteria that may also be present in the infection. How do I use Daktarin oral gel? Daktarin oral gel should be used four times a day at regular intervals. Follow the instructions given by your doctor or pharmacist regarding how much gel to use and how long to use it for. Daktarin oral gel should be used after eating. If the infection is just in the mouth, the gel should be applied directly to the affected area(s) with a clean finger. Keep the gel in the mouth for as long as possible before swallowing it. For infections of the mouth, throat and gut you should take the measured amount of gel from the spoon, but keep the gel in your mouth for as long as possible before swallowing it. If you are giving the gel to a child, make sure that you don't put the gel near the back of their throat, as this can be a choking hazard (see below). Each dose should also be divided into smaller portions. If you have false teeth (dentures) and are treating oral thrush you should also brush the gel onto your dentures after you take them out at night. This is to kill any fungus that may be on the dentures. If you forget to take a dose don't worry, just leave out the missed dose and take the next dose when it is due. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed dose. You should keep using Daktarin oral gel for seven days after the symptoms have cleared up. This will make sure the infection is fully treated and thus help prevent it coming back. If your symptoms persist despite using Daktarin oral gel you should consult your doctor. What should I know before using Daktarin oral gel? Daktarin oral gel is sticky. Make sure that the gel doesn't obstruct the throat, as this can cause choking, particularly in children. The gel should not be put at the back of the throat, and for children under two years of age, each dose should be divided into smaller portions. If you are giving Daktarin oral gel to a child who is breastfeeding you should not apply the medicine to your nipple to give it, as the baby can choke on the gel if it is given this way. If you get a skin rash or any blistering or peeling of the skin or inside of the mouth while using Daktarin oral gel, it is important to stop using it and consult a doctor. Who should not use Daktarin oral gel? Babies under four months of age, or those whose swallowing reflex is not yet fully developed (for example babies born prematurely who may not fully develop the swallowing reflex until they are five or six months of age). People with liver problems. People with rare hereditary blood disorders called porphyrias. People who are allergic to any ingredient. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using Daktarin oral gel and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Can I use Daktarin oral gel while pregnant or breastfeeding? Daktarin oral gel is not recommended for use during pregnancy unless considered essential by your doctor. It should only be used if the expected benefit to the mother is greater than any possible risk to the developing baby. Get medical advice from your doctor before using this medicine if you are or think you could be pregnant. It is not known if miconazole passes into breast milk. Daktarin oral gel should be used with caution in nursing mothers, and only if the benefits to the mother outweigh any risks to the nursing infant. Get medical advice from your doctor before using this medicine if you are breastfeeding. What are the possible side effects of Daktarin oral gel? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with miconazole. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using Daktarin oral gel will experience that or any side effect. Common Feeling sick and vomiting. Regurgitating the medicine. Dry mouth. Mouth discomfort. Uncommon&nbsp; Change in sense of taste. Unknown frequency Choking. Diarrhoea. Tongue discolouration. Sore mouth. Allergic skin reactions. Inflammation of the liver (hepatitis). Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more&nbsp;information about the possible side effects of Daktarin oral gel.&nbsp; Can I use Daktarin oral gel with other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. The manufacturer states that Daktarin oral gel should not be used by people who are taking any of the following medicines. This is because miconazole can reduce the breakdown of these medicines in the body and hence increase the risk of their side effects: astemizole cisapride ergot alkaloids, eg ergotamine, methysergide midazolam taken by mouth mizolastine pimozide quetiapine quinidine sertindole statins for lowering cholesterol, eg atorvastatin, simvastatin and lovastatin (except pravastatin which is unaffected). Your doctor may decide to prescribe you this medicine even if you are taking a statin. In this case you should look out for possible side effects of the statin and tell your doctor straight away if you notice any signs of unexplained muscle pain, tenderness or weakness or dark coloured urine. terfenadine triazolam. Miconazole increases the anti-blood-clotting effect of anticoagulant medicines such as warfarin, nicoumalone and phenindione, which may increase the risk of bleeding. If you are taking an anticoagulant your doctor may want to monitor your blood clotting time (prothrombin time or INR) during and after a course Daktarin oral gel, and may need to alter the dose of your anticoagulant as a result. Miconazole may increase the blood levels of the following medicines, which could increase the risk of their side effects: benzodiazepines such as alprazolam buspirone busulfan calcium channel blockers such as felodipine, nifedipine carbamazepine ciclosporin cilostazol disopyramide nateglinide phenytoin protease inhibitors for HIV infection, eg saquinavir ranolazine reboxetine rifabutin sirolimus sulphonylureas used for diabetes, eg glibenclamide, gliclazide, glipizide and tolbutamide (the blood sugar lowering effect of these medicines may be enhanced, which may cause hypoglycaemia) tacrolimus. References: https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2166546.PA0823_059_001.e7f468f0-d44d-4c6f-8bc5-9273dffadc86.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved%20Cream.151029.pdf http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/1952/SPC/Daktarin+2++w+w+Cream/ http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Daktarin-Cream.aspx http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/mouth-and-teeth/a6504/daktarin-oral-gel-miconazole/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Oral thrush Print This Page Health Reference Oral thrush Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin