Copaxone, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Copaxone Injection You are here: Home Copaxone Injection Copaxone (Glatiramer) is used to reduce the number of times you suffer attacks of MS (relapses). It It is used to treat patients who are able to walk without help. Copaxone may also be used in patients who have experienced symptoms for the first time which indicate a high risk of developing MS. Why have I been prescribed Copaxone? Copaxone (Glatiramer) is used to reduce the number of times you suffer attacks of MS (relapses).&nbsp; It is used to treat patients who are able to walk without help. Copaxone may also be used in patients who have experienced symptoms for the first time which indicate a high risk of developing MS. How does it work? Copaxone modifies the way in which your body’s immune system works (it is classed as an immunomodulating agent). The symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS) are thought to be caused by a defect in the body’s immune system, which causes it to attack the insulation (Myelin) around nerves. Copaxone stops it doing this. When and how do I take it? Copaxone is injected under the skin daily . See leaflet that comes with Copaxone for instructions on how to inject it. What’s the dose? 20mg daily. Could it interact with other tablets? There is no evidence of any interaction between Copaxone and other medicines. However, you should still tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Very common (more than 1 in 10 patients): Skin reactions at the injection site. They included: reddening of skin, pain, formation&nbsp;of wheals, itching, tissue swelling, inflammation and hypersensitivity at the injection&nbsp;site. These injection site reactions are not unusual and normally decrease over time. Further very common side effects included: Gastrointestinal disorders: nausea General disorders: feeling weak, chest pain , non-specific pain Infections: infections, flu Musculoskeletal disorders: pain in the joints or back Nervous system disorders: headache Psychiatric disorders: anxiety , depression Skin disorders: skin rash Common (less than 1 in 10, but more than 1 in 100 patients): Blood disorders: swollen lymph nodes Cardiac disorders: rapid heart beats, rapid and throbbing heartbeat (palpitations) Ear disorders: ear problems Eye disorders: eye problems, double vision Gastrointestinal disorders: problems with your bottom, constipation, tooth fillings,&nbsp;indigestion, difficulty swallowing, bowel incontinence, vomiting. General disorders: chills, local reactions, accumulation of fluid, swollen ankles, swollen&nbsp;face, high temperature, loss of tissue under the skin at injection site Immune system disorders: allergic reactions Infections: infection of the respiratory track, stomach, ear, runny nose, cold sores,&nbsp;tooth abscess, vaginal thrush Liver disorders: abnormal liver function test Metabolic disorders: weight gain, loss of appetite Musculoskeletal disorders: pain in your neck Neoplasms benign and malignant disorders: skin growths, tissue growth Nervous system disorders: altered taste, abnormal tension of arteries or muscles,&nbsp;migraine, problems with speech, fainting, tremor Psychiatric disorders: nervousness Renal disorders: inability to empty your bladder, need to empty your bladder quickly,&nbsp;frequent urination Respiratory disorders: cough, hayfever Skin disorders: bruising, excessive sweating, itching , nettle rash and other skin problems Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Glatiramer acetate. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Do not take Copaxone 20 mg/ml if you are pregnant. Tell your doctor if you become&nbsp;pregnant while you are taking this medicine or if you plan to become pregnant. You should use effective birth-control (e.g. the ‘pill’ or condoms) to avoid pregnancy&nbsp;during the treatment with Copaxone. In case you would like to breast-feed while taking Copaxone, please discuss this first with your doctor. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.ms-society.ie/uploads/File/Living%20with%20MS/Treating%20and%20Managing%20MS/MS%20Ireland%20Copaxone%20Information%20Sheet%20-%20March%202015.pdf http://www.drugs.com/copaxone.html https://www.copaxone.com/ http://www.rxlist.com/copaxone-drug.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glatiramer_acetate &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Multiple sclerosis Print This Page More Videos... Copaxone Health Reference Multiple sclerosis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin