Cordarone, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cordarone-X Tablets You are here: Home Cordarone-X Tablets Cordarone X (Amiodarone) Tablets can be used to: Treat uneven heartbeats Treat an illness called Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome. Treat other types of heartbeats known as ‘atrial flutter’ or ‘atrial fibrillation’. Treat fast heartbeats which may happen suddenly and may be uneven. Why have I been prescribed Cordarone X? Cordarone X (Amiodarone) Tablets can be used to: Treat uneven heartbeats where other medicines either have not worked or cannot be used. Treat an illness called Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome. This is where your heart beats unusually fast. Treat other types of fast or uneven heartbeats known as ‘atrial flutter’ or ‘atrial fibrillation’. Cordarone X Tablets are used only when other medicines can not be used. Treat fast heartbeats which may happen suddenly and may be uneven. Cordarone X Tablets are used only when other medicines cannot be used. How does it work? It works by controlling the uneven beating of your heart (called ‘arrhythmias’). Taking the tablets helps your heartbeat to return to normal. When and how do I take it? Take this medicine by mouth. Swallow the tablets whole. Do not crush or chew your tablets. Do not drink grapefruit juice while taking this medicine. This is because drinking grapefruit juice while taking Cordarone X tablets can increase your chance of getting side effects. What’s the dose? The usual starting dose is 200 mg (one 200 mg or two 100 mg Cordarone X Tablets) three times each day for one week. The dose will then be lowered to 200 mg twice each day for one week. The dose will then be lowered to 200 mg once each day, until you are told otherwise. In some cases, your doctor may then decide to either increase or lower the amount you take each day. This will depend on how you react to this medicine. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines. This includes medicines you buy without a prescription, including herbal medicines. This is because Cordarone X Tablets can affect the way some other medicines work. Also some medicines can affect the way Cordarone X Tablets works. In particular, do not take this medicine and tell your doctor, if you are taking: Other medicines for an uneven heartbeat (such as sotalol, quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide or bretylium). Medicines for infections (such as intra-venous erythromycin, co-trimoxazole, moxifloxacin or pentamidine) Medicines for schizophrenia (such as chlorpromazine, thioridazine, fluphenazine, pimozide, haloperidol, amisulpiride or sertindole) Medicines for other mental illnesses (such as lithium, doxepin, maprotiline or amitriptyline) Medicines for malaria (such as quinine, mefloquine, chloroquine or halofantrine) Medicines used for hay fever , rashes or other allergies called antihistamines (such as terfenadine, astemizole or mizolastine) Tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following medicines: Medicines for infection (such as ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin or levofloxacin) Medicines for heart problems called beta-blockers (such as propranolol) Medicines called calcium channel blockers - for chest pain ( angina ) or high blood pressure (such as diltiazem or verapamil) Medicines for constipation (laxatives) such as bisacodyl or senna Medicines for high cholesterol (statins) such as simvastatin or pravastatin The following medicines can increase the chance of you getting side effects, when taken with Cordarone X Tablets: Amphotericin (when given directly into a vein) - used for fungal infections Medicines for inflammation (corticosteroids) such as hydrocortisone, betamethasone or prednisolone Water tablets (diuretics) General anaesthetics or high dose oxygen - used during surgery Tetracosactide - used to test some hormone problems Cordarone X Tablets may increase the effect of the following medicines: Ciclosporin and tacrolimus - used to help prevent rejection of transplants Medicines for impotence such as sildenafil , tadalafil or vardenafil Fentanyl - used for pain relief Ergotamine - used for migraines Midazolam - used to relieve anxiety or to help you relax before surgery Flecainide - another medicine used for uneven heartbeats. Your doctor should monitor your treatment and may half your dose of Flecainide Lidocaine – used as an anaesthetic If you are not sure if any of the above apply to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking Cordarone X Tablets. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Stop taking Cordarone X Tablets and see a doctor or go to a hospital straight away if:&nbsp;You have an allergic reaction. The signs may include: a rash swallowing or breathing problems swollen eyelids, face, lips, throat or tongue Common side effects include: (affects less than 1 in 10 people): You get yellowing of the skin or eyes ( jaundice ) feel tired or sick loss of appetite, stomach pain or high temperature These can be signs of liver problems or damage which can be very dangerous.&nbsp;Difficulty breathing or tightness in the chest, coughing which will not go away, wheezing, weight loss and fever . This could be due to inflammation of your lungs which&nbsp;can be very dangerous. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Limit the amount of alcohol you drink while taking this medicine. This is because drinking alcohol while taking this medicine will increase the chance of you having problems with your liver. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about the amount of alcohol you can drink. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Cordarone should not be given during pregnancy except in exceptional circumstances. It should not be used during breast feeding. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=51be39a2-9134-402c-95ad-defe47406ff8 http://www.rxlist.com/cordarone-drug.htm https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/27085/SPC/Cordarone+X+200mg+Tablets/ http://www.drugs.com/cdi/cordarone.html http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM152841.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Atrial Fibrillation Print This Page More Videos... What is Atrial Fibrillation? Health Reference Atrial Fibrillation Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin