Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Daktacort Cream Daktarin Cream Daktarin Oral Gel Daktarin Powder Dalacin 2% Vaginal... Dalacin C Capsules... Dalacin T Lotion Dalmane Dalmapam - Fluraze... Daonil Decapeptyl 3 Month... Deltacortril 2.5mg... Depo Medrone Injec... Depo-Provera Injec... Depreger - Sertral... Dermovate cream an... Dermovate Scalp Ap... Desmospray Nasal S... Desmotabs Desunin (colecalci... Detrusitol Tablets Dexafree Eye Drops Dexamethasone DHEA Diabrezide Diaclide Diaglyc Diamicron MR 30mg Diamox (acetazolam... Dianette Diazepam Diclac Gel Diclac Suppositori... Diclac Tablets Difene - (Diclofen... Difene Gel Difene Suppositori... Differin Cream/Gel Diflazole - (Fluco... Diflucan Capsules/... Digoxin Dilzem Tablets/Cap... Dioralyte Diovan - (Valsarta... Dipentum Capsules Diprosalic Ointmen... Diprosalic Scalp A... Distaclor Suspensi... Distaclor Tablets Dithrocream Ditropan Tablets Dixarit Tablets Dolmatil Tablets Dona Sachets Dostinex (cabergol... Dothep Dovobet Cream/Gel Dovonex Cream/Oint... Doxazosin Tablets Doxepin (Sinequan) Doxycycline Capsul... Drogenil Drynol Tablets Duac Once Daily Cr... Duloxetine Capsule... DuoTrav Drops Duphalac Duphaston (dydroge... Dymista Nasal Spra... Medicine - D Daktacort Cream Daktacort hydrocortisone cream contains two active ingredients, an antifungal called miconazole and a steroid called hydrocortisone. Daktarin Cream Daktarin cream contains the active ingredient miconazole. Miconazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Daktarin Oral Gel Daktarin oral gel is prescribed to prevent and treat fungal infections of the mouth, throat, stomach or intestines. Daktarin Powder Daktarin powder contains the active ingredient miconazole. Miconazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Dalacin 2% Vaginal Cream Dalacin cream is an antibiotic cream prescribed to treat a bacterial infection of the vagina called bacterial vaginosis (BV). Dalacin C Capsules - (Clindamycin) Dalacin C capsules contain the active ingredient clindamycin hydrochloride, which is a type of medicine called an antibiotic. It is used to treat infections with bacteria. Dalacin T Lotion Dalacin T is an antibiotic available as a solution or lotion that you apply to the skin to treat acne (spots). Dalmane Dalmane (Flurazepam) is used for the short term treatment of sleeplessness or insomnia. It can help overcome any difficulties in getting to sleep and may help if you wake up frequently in the middle of the night. Dalmapam - Flurazepam Dalmapam (Flurazepam) is used for the short term treatment of sleeplessness or insomnia. It can help overcome any difficulties in getting to sleep and may help if you wake up frequently in the middle of the night. Daonil Doctors prescribe Daonil (Daonil) to treat diabetes type 2 which does not respond to dietary measures and which generally only occurs in adults. The tablets lower the sugar content in your blood if this is too high. Decapeptyl 3 Months injection Decapeptyl (triptorelin) is used in men for the treatment of a disease of the prostate, in women for the treatment of endometriosis and infertility, and in children for the treatment of precocious puberty. Deltacortril 2.5mg &amp; 5mg Tablets Corticosteroids (cortisone-like medicines) are used to provide relief for inflamed areas of the body. They lessen swelling, redness, itching, and allergic reactions. They are often used as part of the treatment for a number of different diseases, such as severe allergies, skin problems, asthma etc. Depo Medrone Injection Depo-Medrone is used in the trreatment of a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Depo-Provera Injection The contraceptive injection contains progestogen. There is only one type is available in Ireland, Depo-Provera, and it is effective for 12 weeks. Depreger - Sertraline Depreger (Sertraline) is a treatment for adults with depression and/or anxiety disorders. The anxiety disorders that ‘DEPREGER’ is used to treat are: obsessive compulsive disorder, panic disorder ,social anxiety disorder, post traumatic stress disorder and generalised anxiety disorder. Dermovate cream and ointment (clobetasol) Dermovate cream and ointment both contain the active ingredient clobetasol, which is a steroid medicine used to reduce inflammation. Dermovate Scalp Application Dermovate is used to help reduce the redness and itchiness of certain scalp problems in adults, the elderly and children over the age of 1 year. These include frequently relapsing dermatoses and psoriasis (thickened patches of inflamed, red skin, often covered by silvery scales) that have not responded to milder steroid creams, ointments, lotions or scalp applications. Desmospray Nasal Spray Desmospray is indicated for: The treatment of nocturia associated with multiple sclerosis where other treatments have failed. The diagnosis and treatment of vasopressin-sensitive cranial diabetes insipidus. Establishing renal concentration capacity. Desmotabs DDAVP tablets and DDAVP Melt tablets both contain the active ingredient desmopressin, which is a type of medicine called a vasopressin analogue. It is similar to a hormone produced naturally by the body, called vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone. Desunin (colecalciferol) Desunin tablets contain the active ingredient colecalciferol, which is also known as vitamin D3. Each tablet contains 800 IU colecalciferol, which is equivalent to 20 micrograms vitamin D3. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin