Dovonex, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dovonex Cream/Ointment You are here: Home Dovonex Cream/Ointment Dovonex ointment contains the active ingredient calcipotriol, which is a medicine that is a derivative of vitamin D. When applied to the skin it works by reducing the production of skin cells. What is it used for? Plaque psoriasis (psoriasis vulgaris). How does it work? Dovonex ointment contains the active ingredient calcipotriol, which is a medicine that is a derivative of vitamin D. When applied to the skin it works by reducing the production of skin cells. In psoriasis, the scaling and thickening of the skin and the appearance of raised plaques are the result of excessive skin cell production. Calcipotriol reduces the excessive skin cell production and promotes normal skin cell growth. This helps flatten and clear the psoriasis plaques. Using this medicine will improve your skin gradually over time, with maximum improvement taking up to 12 weeks of treatment. Use with caution in Generalised pustular or erythrodermic exfoliative forms of psoriasis. Not to be used in Children under six years of age. People with disorders of calcium metabolism in the body. Severe liver disease. Severe kidney disease. Dovonex ointment must not be applied to the face. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy has not been established. It is not recommended for use in pregnancy unless considered essential by your doctor. Seek medical advice from your doctor. It is not known if this medicine passes into breast milk. It is not recommended for use during breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. Seek medical advice from your doctor. If your doctor says you can use this medicine while breastfeeding you should not apply it to the breast area. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Very common (affect more than 1 in 10 people) Skin irritation in area of use. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Rash. Burning or stinging sensation. Itching. Dry skin. Reddening of skin. Skin inflammation (contact dermatitis). Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Aggravation of psoriasis. Eczema. Very rare (affect less than 1 in 10,000 people) Allergic reactions. Increased level of calcium in the blood or urine (especially if the recommended dose is exceeded). Unknown frequency Abnormal reaction of the skin to light, usually a rash (photosensitivity). Temporary changes in skin pigmentation. Hives. Facial swelling. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. The manufacturer of this medicine has not studied its use with other medicines applied to the same area of skin at the same time. However, if you are using other medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin, it is best to leave several minutes between applying each product to allow them time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6612/dovonex-ointment-calcipotriol/ https://www.drugs.com/dovonex.html https://www.psoriasis.org/about-psoriasis/treatments/topicals/non-steroid http://www.dovonexpsoriasis.ie &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis Print This Page More Videos... Psoriasis Eczema Health Reference Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin