Betnovate RD Cream, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betnovate RD Cream/Ointment You are here: Home Betnovate RD Cream/Ointment Betnovate RD cream is one of a group of medicines called topical steroids. It is a strong and rapidly effective treatment for inflamed skin conditions such as eczema, psoriasis (excluding widespread plaque psoriasis) and dermatitis. Why have I been prescribed Betnovate RD? Betnovate RD cream is one of a group of medicines called topical steroids. It is a strong and rapidly effective treatment for inflamed skin conditions such as eczema , psoriasis (excluding widespread plaque psoriasis) and dermatitis . RD stands for “ready diluted” as Betnovate RD (ready diluted) 0.025% w/w Cream contains less active ingredient than Betnovate cream. How does it work? Topical steroids reduce the redness and itchiness of certain skin problems. They should not be confused with “anabolic” steroids misused by some body builders and taken as tablets or injections. When and how do I take it? If your doctor has told you in detail how to use the cream then keep to that advice, otherwise: Up to three times a day, after washing your hands, gently rub the correct amount of cream into the skin until it has all disappeared. For an adult: You should find that two fingertips of cream will treat both hands or both feet three fingertips of cream will treat one arm six fingertips of cream will treat one leg fourteen fingertips of cream will treat the front and back of one trunk Do not worry if you find you need a little more or a little less than this - it is only a rough guide. Wash your hands before using the cream. Gently rub the correct amount into the skin until it has all disappeared. Unless used for treating the hands wash them again after using the cream. Anyone who helps to rub in the cream should also do the same or wear disposable plastic gloves. For a child: It should not be used in children under one year of age. The smaller the child the less you use. A child of 4 years needs about a third of the adult amount. A course of treatment for a child should not normally last more than five days unless your doctor has told you to use it for longer. What’s the dose? See above. Could it interact with other tablets? There are no known interactins between Betnovate RD and other medicines. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Most people find using this cream causes no problems when used in the right amount for the correct length of time. Using more than the correct amount may allow the active ingredient to pass through the skin and affect other parts of the body, especially in infants and children. The use of airtight bandages or dressings over the treated area increases the risk. Repeated courses of topical steroids over a long period of time may sometimes cause changes in hair growth and skin colour, itching, a burning sensation or reddening of the skin where the cream was applied. If you feel unwell or have any unusual discomfort you do not understand, tell your doctor as soon as possible. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no know interactions between Betnovate RD and alcohol. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or think you may become pregnant. He will decide whether to use betnovate RD or not. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://irishskinfoundation.ie/news/detail/drug-availability-bulletin-betnovate-and-eumovate-creams-and-ointments http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2126867.PA1077_002_001.353e07f7-678a-44e1-bdbb-72ccce5ac51f.000001Betnovate%20C%20PIL.141217.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6308/betnovate-cream-ointment-lotion-betamethasone/ http://www.drugs.com/cons/betnovate.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/707 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Eczema , Psoriasis Print This Page More Videos... Eczema Eczema - (Contact Eczema) Health Reference Eczema Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin