Diclac Suppositries, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Diclac Suppositories You are here: Home Diclac Suppositories Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories are used to relieve pain and inflammation. It is used to relieve painful conditions associated with your bones and joints and to reduce swelling and inflammation (e.g. arthritis) and for sprains, strains and bruising of tendons and ligaments, and in acute gout. Why have I been prescribed Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories? Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories are used to relieve pain and inflammation. It is used to relieve painful conditions associated with your bones and joints and to reduce&nbsp;swelling and inflammation&nbsp; (e.g. arthritis) &nbsp;and for sprains,&nbsp; strains &nbsp;and bruising of tendons and ligaments, and in&nbsp; acute gout. It can also be used to reduce pain or inflammation after surgery. It can also be used for period pain. How does it work? Difene blocks the production of chemicals in the body called prostaglandins which are responsible for pain and inflammation. When and how do I take it? It is important that you use the lowest dose that controls your pain and you should not use Difene for longer than necessary. What’s the dose? The dose will depend on your complaint and strength of suppository prescribed.&nbsp; Could it interact with other tablets? If you are taking other medicines make sure your doctor is aware of them before you take Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories, particularly if they are any of the following: other anti-inflammatory or ”painkilling” medicines water tablets e.g. diuretics corticosteroids or other medicines that may upset your stomach blood tablets e.g. anticoagulants such as warfarin lithium, cyclosporin and methotrexate anti-platelet agents e.g. aspirin medicines for heart conditions or high blood pressure (Beta Blockers, ACE inhibitors, digoxin) quinolone antibiotics aminoglycosides e.g. streptomycin diabetic tablets drugs for the treatment of gout e.g. probenecid drugs for the treatment of depression e.g. selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors If you are presently taking any of these medicines and are unsure talk to your doctor or&nbsp;pharmacist. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like other similar medicines, Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories may occasionally cause some unwanted effects. These may occur in the initial stages of treatment and may be more serious if they occur in the elderly. If you get any of the following: Stomach pain,&nbsp; indigestion , heartburn, wind, nausea or vomiting. Any sign of bleeding in the stomach or intestine, for example, when emptying your bowels. Gastro-intestinal bleeding may be fatal. Skin rash associated with blistering,&nbsp; itching &nbsp;or painful red areas Wheezing or shortness of breath Yellowing of your skin or the whites of your eyes. Persistent sore throat or high temperature. An unexpected change in the amount of urine produced and/or its appearance. STOP taking the Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories and tell your doctor. If you notice that you are bruising more easily than usual or have frequent sore throats or infections tell your doctor. Difene may occasionally cause stomach discomfort or heartburn, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, dizziness or vertigo and skin rash. Medicines such as Difene may be associated with a small increased risk of heart attack (“myocardial infarction”) or stroke. Rare unwanted effects include drowsiness, itchy or blistering skin, vomiting blood or passing black&nbsp;stools, problems with your liver or kidneys and sometimes wheezing, shortness of breath or fluid retention. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between Diclac (Diclofenac) Suppositories and alcohol. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Difene should not be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: 1. Medicines.ie website- difene SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/3639/SPC/Difene+Tablets/ 2. Medicines.ie- difene PIL http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/8293/PIL/Difene+Tablets/&nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Sprains and strains , Arthritis , Gout Print This Page Health Reference Sprains and strains Arthritis Gout Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin