Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Zacin Cream Zaditen Tablets/Sy... Zanidip (lercanidi... Zantac (Ranitidine... Zarontin - (Ethosu... Zemplar (paricalci... Zepholin-SR Tablet... Zesger - (Lisinopr... Zesger Plus Tablet... Zestoretic Tablets Zestril - (Lisinop... Zimovane Tablets -... Zinc Zindaclin Gel Zineryt Solution Zinnat Suspension Zinnat Tablets Zirpine - (Cetiriz... Zirtek - (Cetirizi... Zirtene - (Cetiriz... Zismirt Tablets -... Zispin Tablets - (... Zithromax Capsule/... Zocor - Simvastati... Zoely Tablets Zofran Tablets/Syr... Zoftacot 3.35 mg/m... Zoladex Injection Zolepant - (Pantop... Zolpidem Tablets Zomel - Lansoprazo... Zometa Infusion Zomig - (Zolmitrip... Zonegran Capsules Zopiclone Tablets Zopitan Tablets -... Zoton Zotrole Zovirax Cream Zovirax Tablets/Su... Zyban Tablets - (B... Zydol Capsules - (... Zyloric - (Allopur... Zyprexa - (Olanzap... Zyvox (linezolid) Medicine - Z Zacin Cream For the symptomatic relief of pain associated with osteoarthritis. Zaditen Tablets/Syrup Zaditen tablets and elixir contain the active ingredient ketotifen hydrogen fumarate, which is a type of medicine called a sedating antihistamine. Zanidip (lercanidipine) Tablets Zanidip tablets contain the active ingredient lercanidipine hydrochloride, which is a type of medicine called a calcium channel blocker. Zantac (Ranitidine) Tablets Zantac is used to treat various stomach problems involving irritation due to stomach acid. Zarontin - (Ethosuximide) Zarontin is approved for absence seizures. Ethosuximide is considered the first choice drug for treating absence seizures in part because it lacks the idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity of the alternative anti-absence drug, valproic acid. Zemplar (paricalcitol) Zemplar capsules and injection contain the active ingredient paricalcitol, which is a type of medicine called a vitamin D analogue. It is used to treat overactivity of the parathyroid glands in people with chronic kidney failure. Zepholin-SR Tablets Zepholin SR (Theophylline) tablets are used to treat asthma, long-term breathing difficulties such as emphysema and chronic bronchitis, and are sometimes used to treat heart failure in adults. Zepholin SR also reduces swelling in the lungs of asthma patients and relieves the chest tightness. Zesger - (Lisinopril) Zesger (Lisinopril) can be used for the following conditions: To treat high blood pressure (hypertension). To treat heart failure. If you have recently had a heart attack (myocardial infarction). To treat kidney problems caused by Type II diabetes in people with high blood pressure. Zesger Plus Tablets Zesger Plus (Lisinopril/Hydrochlorthiazide) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). It contains two medicines called lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide. Zestoretic Tablets Zestoretic (Lisinopril/Hydrochlorthiazide) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). It contains two medicines called lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide. Zestril - (Lisinopril) Zestril (Lisinopril) can be used for the following conditions: To treat high blood pressure (hypertension). To treat heart failure. If you have recently had a heart attack (myocardial infarction). To treat kidney problems caused by Type II diabetes in people with high blood pressure. Zimovane Tablets - (Zopiclone) Short term treatment of insomnia in adults, including difficulties in falling asleep, nocturnal awakening and early awakening, transient, situational or chronic insomnia, and insomnia secondary to psychiatric disturbances, in situations where the insomnia is debilitating or is causing severe distress for the patient. Long term continuous use is not recommended. Zinc Multiple studies in developing countries found that zinc supplementation may reduce the severity and duration of diarrhea in children, especially those that are malnourished and with low zinc levels.&nbsp; Zindaclin Gel Zindaclin is an anti-inflammatory gel for external use on the skin. It contains the active ingredient clindamycin, which is an antibiotic medicine. Clindamycin works against certain types of bacteria that live on the skin. Zineryt Solution Zineryt solution contains two active ingredients, erythromycin and zinc acetate. Zinnat Suspension Zinnat is a broad spectrum antibiotic which means it is active against a wide variety of bacteria. It treats infections by killing or stopping the growth of the bacteria that cause them. Zinnat Tablets Zinnat is a broad spectrum antibiotic which means it is active against a wide variety of bacteria. It treats infections by killing or stopping the growth of the bacteria that cause them. Zirpine - (Cetirizine) Zirpine allergy relief tablets contain the active ingredient cetirizine, which is a type of medicine called a non-sedating antihistamine. Zirpine works by preventing the actions of histamine. Zirtek - (Cetirizine) Zirtek allergy relief tablets contain the active ingredient cetirizine, which is a type of medicine called a non-sedating antihistamine. Cetirizine works by preventing the actions of histamine. Zirtene - (Cetirizine) Zirtene allergy relief tablets contain the active ingredient cetirizine, which is a type of medicine called a non-sedating antihistamine. Cetirizine works by preventing the actions of histamine. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin