Creon, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Creon Capsules You are here: Home Creon Capsules Creon 10000 is a high strength pancreatic enzyme supplement. Pancreatic enzyme supplements are used by people whose bodies do not make enough of their own enzymes to digest their food. Why have I been prescribed Creon? Creon 10000 is a high strength pancreatic enzyme supplement. Pancreatic enzyme supplements are used by people whose bodies do not make enough of their own enzymes to digest their food. How does it work? The enzymes in Creon 10000 work by digesting food as it passes through the gut. It is therefore essential that Creon 10000 is taken at the same time as eating a meal or a snack. This will allow the enzymes to mix thoroughly with the food. When and how do I take it? Always take Creon 10000 at the same time as eating a meal or a snack and drink plenty of water. Swallow the capsules whole or Open the capsules and mix the granules with soft food. Swallow the mixture straight away, without&nbsp;chewing. Drink plenty of liquid every day. You should keep taking your medicine for as long as your doctor advises. What’s the dose? Always follow your doctor or dietician’s advice on how many capsules to take. If your doctor advises you to increase the number of capsules you take, you should do so slowly. If you still have fatty stools or abdominal pain, talk to your doctor or dietician. Could it interact with other tablets? There are no known important interactions between Creon and other medicines. If you experience any unusual symptoms while taking Creon and other medicines you should tell your prescriber. Herbal products should only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Creon 10000 can cause side eff ects (unwanted eff ects or reactions). But not everyone gets them. If you have severe or prolonged abdominal pain, contact your doctor immediately. Fibrosing colonopathy: A rare bowel disorder called fibrosing colonopathy was reported in a small number of children, with cystic fibrosis, taking large doses of both high and low-strength enzymes. This is not known to happen to children taking Creon 10000. But if you notice any unusual abdominal symptoms while taking Creon 10000 – contact your doctor. Uncommon side effects (1 in 500 patients): These side effects may affect about one in 500 people taking Creon 10000: diarrhoea constipation stomach pains feeling sick skin reactions, such as a rash or itching. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Creon. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You should only take Creon during pregnancy or while breast feeding if your doctor thinks you need it. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM152847.pdf http://www.creon.com/ http://www.drugs.com/creon.html http://www.rxlist.com/creon-drug.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin