Elocon, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Elocon Cream/Ointment You are here: Home Elocon Cream/Ointment Elocon cream and ointment both contain the active ingredient mometasone, which is a steroid medicine used to reduce inflammation. How does Elocon work? Elocon cream and ointment both contain the active ingredient mometasone furoate, which is a type of medicine known as a topical corticosteroid. Mometasone ointment is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Corticosteroids are medicines used for reducing inflammation. Skin inflammation may occur as a result of an allergic reaction, or irritation of the skin. It is caused by the immune system releasing substances that make blood vessels in the skin widen. This makes the irritated area become red, swollen, itchy and painful, as is seen in dermatitis or eczema. When mometasone is applied to the skin it works by acting inside the skin cells to decrease the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces swelling, redness and itch. Mometasone is a potent corticosteroid that is applied to the skin to treat severe inflammatory skin disorders, such as dermatitis and psoriasis that have not responded to milder steroids. Elocon ointment is more greasy than the cream. It is more suitable for very dry, scaly areas of skin, whereas moist or weepy skin is best treated with the cream. How do I use Elocon? This medicine should be applied thinly and evenly to the affected area(s) of skin once a day.&nbsp; If your doctor has advised you to use dressings with this medicine, the skin should be cleansed before applying the cream or ointment under a fresh dressing. Wash your hands thoroughly after applying this medicine, unless the hands are the area being treated. You should continue using this medicine for as long as your doctor has prescribed. However, if you are applying this medicine to the face or to a child's skin, it should preferably not be used for longer than five days at a time. Follow the instructions given by your doctor. Don't use this medicine more often or for longer than advised by your doctor. Don't apply your moisturisers to the same area of skin at the same time as this medicine. Try to leave at least 30 minutes between applying moisturisers and this medicine, as otherwise the moisturiser could dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. Elocon should be used with caution in Children. Psoriasis. If you have been prescribed this medicine to treat psoriasis you should have regular check-ups with your doctor. This is because although corticosteroids may be useful for psoriasis in the short-term, they can sometimes make psoriasis worse, and may cause the condition to relapse into generalised pustular psoriasis after the treatment is stopped. Elocon should not be used in Viral skin infections, such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores, herpes simplex, warts or verrucas. Bacterial skin infections, such as impetigo. Fungal skin infections such as thrush, ringworm, athlete's foot. Acne. Chronic inflammatory disorder of the facial skin (acne rosacea). Inflammatory rash around the mouth (perioral dermatitis). Treatment of itching around the back passage and genitals. Nappy rash. Skin sores caused by syphilis. Skin sores caused by tuberculosis. Widespread plaque psoriasis. Elocon should not be applied to wounds or ulcerated areas of skin. Elocon is not licensed for use in children under two years of age. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Can I use Elocon while pregnant or breastfeeding? Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should not be used during pregnancy unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. This medicine should not be used during breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings or for prolonged periods of time. If it is applied to the breasts it should be washed off carefully before breastfeeding and then reapplied afterwards. Possible side effects of Elocon Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Skin irritation, eg itching, burning, tingling, stinging on application. Spread or worsening of untreated infections. Reduced skin pigmentation. Stretch marks (striae). Thinning of the skin. Groupings of fine blood vessels becoming prominent under the skin (telangiectasia). Excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis). Inflammation of the hair follicles (folliculitis). Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Prolonged use of this medicine on extensive areas of skin, broken or raw skin, skin folds or underneath airtight dressings may on rare occasions result in enough corticosteroid being absorbed to have side effects on other parts of the body, for example a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands. Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more&nbsp;information about the possible side effects of this medicine. Can I use Elocon with other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you are using other topical medicines on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. If you apply moisturisers shortly before or after applying this medicine these can dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. Try to apply your moisturisers at a different time of day, or at least 30 minutes before or after this one. References: http://www.rxlist.com/elocon-ointment-side-effects-drug-center.htm https://www.drugs.com/elocon.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6651/elocon-cream-and-ointment-mometasone/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/16309/SPC/Elocon+Cream/ http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2158634.PPA1328_127_002.b21bc87f-4acc-443a-bb9d-568bc6c03607.000001pil.150323.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) , Eczema , Psoriasis Print This Page Health Reference Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Eczema Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin