Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Elocon Scalp Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Elocon Scalp Lotion You are here: Home Elocon Scalp Lotion Elocon Scalp Lotion is one of a group of medicines called topical corticosteroids. It is classified as a “potent corticosteroid”. These medicines are put on the surface of the skin to reduce the redness and itchiness caused by certain skin problems. In adults and children, Elocon Scalp Lotion is used to reduce redness and itchiness caused by certain conditions affecting the scalp, called psoriasis or dermatitis. Psoriasis is a skin disease in which itchy, scaly, pink patches develop on the elbows, knees, scalp and other parts of the body. Dermatitis is a condition brought on by the skin reacting to outside agents e.g. detergents, causing the skin to become red and itchy. What is Elocon scalp lotion used for? Seborrhoeic eczema affecting the scalp. Psoriasis affecting the scalp. How does Elocon scalp lotion work? Elocon scalp lotion contains the active ingredient mometasone furoate, which is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. Corticosteroids are medicines used for reducing inflammation. Inflammation of the skin happens due to irritation of the skin, and is caused by the release of various substances that are important in the immune system. These substances cause blood vessels to widen, resulting in the irritated area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful, such as is seen in dermatitis or eczema. When mometasone furoate is applied to the skin it works by acting inside the skin cells to decrease the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces swelling, redness and itching. There is a range of potencies of corticosteroids applied to the skin. Mometasone is classed as a potent corticosteroid. It is prescribed to treat severe inflammatory skin disorders such as eczema and psoriasis that have not responded to weaker corticosteroids. Elocon scalp lotion is thinner and easier to apply to the scalp than Elocon ointment and cream. It is used to treat severe inflammatory disorders of the scalp. How do I use Elocon scalp lotion? This medicine is for external use on the scalp only. It must not be used on the face or any other part of the body apart from the scalp. A few drops of Elocon scalp lotion should be gently massaged into the affected area of the scalp once a day. The lotion should be left on the scalp and not washed off. If you need to wash your hair you should wash and dry your hair before applying the scalp lotion. Take care to avoid the scalp lotion running onto the face or into the eyes. Rinse with cold water if accidental contact occurs. Avoid applying it to broken skin. Wash your hands after applying this lotion to avoid accidentally getting it on other areas. You should continue using this medicine for as long as your doctor has prescribed. However, if you are applying this medicine to a child's scalp, it should preferably not be used for longer than five days at a time. Follow the instructions given by your doctor. Don't use this medicine more often or for longer than advised by your doctor. Don't apply moisturisers to the same area of skin at the same time as this medicine. Try to leave at least 30 minutes between applying moisturisers and this medicine, as otherwise the moisturiser could dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. Important information about Elocon scalp lotion Elocon scalp lotion contains flammable alcohol. Do not use it near naked flames or lit objects, such as gas and electric fires and lit cigarettes, or near other sources of heat such as hairdryers. Elocon scalp lotion is for external use on the affected areas of skin only. It must not be taken by mouth. Avoid getting this lotion in the eyes, or inside the mouth or nose. Rinse with cold water if accidental contact occurs. You should never use Elocon as a moisturiser. If corticosteroids are used long-term, on large areas of skin, raw skin, skin folds, or under airtight dressings, they are absorbed into the body more. This increases the risk of local side effects such as skin thinning, and those on other parts of the body, such as a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands. For this reason, continuous, long-term use of this medicine should be avoided wherever possible, particularly in children and on large areas of skin. You should only use airtight dressings over the affected area if instructed by your doctor. Consult your doctor if your skin becomes infected during treatment, as you may need to stop using this medicine and start treatment with antibiotics. Elocon scalp lotion should be used with caution in Children. Psoriasis. If you have been prescribed this medicine to treat psoriasis you should have regular check-ups with your doctor. This is because although corticosteroids may be useful for psoriasis in the short-term, they can sometimes make psoriasis worse, and may cause the condition to relapse into generalised pustular psoriasis after the treatment is stopped. Elocon scalp lotion should not be used in Children under two years of age. Skin infected with viruses (eg chickenpox, shingles), fungi (eg ringworm) or bacteria (eg impetigo). This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. Possible side effects of Elocon scalp lotion Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Skin irritation, eg itching, burning, tingling, stinging on application. Spread or worsening of untreated infections. Inflammation of the hair follicles (folliculitis). Reduced skin pigmentation. Thinning of the skin. Excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis). Stretch marks (striae). Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Pins and needles (paraesthesia). Acne. Prolonged use of this medicine on extensive areas of skin, broken or raw skin, or underneath airtight dressings may on rare occasions result in enough corticosteroid being absorbed to have side effects on other parts of the body, for example a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands.&nbsp; The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. If you think you have experienced a side effect from a medicine or vaccine you should check the patient information leaflet. This lists the known side effects and what to do if you get them. You can also get advice from your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. If they think it's necessary they'll report it for you. How can Elocon scalp lotion affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you are using other topical medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. If you apply moisturisers shortly before or after applying this medicine these can dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. Try to apply your moisturisers at a different time of day, or at least 30 minutes before or after this one. References: https://www.rxlist.com/elocon-lotion-side-effects-drug-center.htm https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8408/elocon-scalp-lotion-mometasone-furoate/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1139/pil https://www.hpra.ie/homepage/site-tools/error-page https://www.nps.org.au/medical-info/medicine-finder/elocon-lotion &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Dermatitis , Psoriasis Print This Page Health Reference Dermatitis Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin