Azilect | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Azilect You are here: Home Azilect Azilect is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. It can be used together with or without Levodopa (another medicine that is used to treat Parkinson’s disease). Why have I been prescribed Azilect? Azilect is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease . It can be used together with or without Levodopa (another medicine that is used to treat Parkinson’s disease). How does it work? With Parkinson’s disease, there is a loss of cells that produce dopamine in the brain. Dopamine is a chemical in the brain involved in movement control. Azilect helps to increase and sustain levels of dopamine in the brain. When and how do I take it? Azilect is usually taken once daily and may be taken with or without food . What’s the dose? The usual dose of Azilect is 1 tablet of 1 mg taken by mouth once daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without prescription, herbal preparations, or if you are smoking or intend to stop smoking. Ask your doctor for advice before taking any of the following medicines together with Azilect: Certain antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants) the antibiotic ciprofloxacin used against infections the cough suppressant dextromethorphan sympathomimetics such as those present in eye drops, nasal and oral decongestants and cold medicine containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine. The use of Azilect together with the antidepressants containing fluoxetine or fluvoxamine should be avoided. If you are starting treatment with Azilect, you should wait at least 5 weeks after stopping fluoxetine treatment. If you are starting treatment with fluoxetine or fluvoxamine, you should wait at least 14 days after stopping Azilect treatment. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Azilect can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. The following side effects have been reported: Very common: abnormal movements (dyskinesia) headache Common: abdominal pain fall allergy fever flu (influenza) general feeling of being unwell (malaise) neck pain chest pain (angina pectoris) low blood pressure when rising to a standing position with symptoms like dizziness/light-headedness (orthostatic hypotension) Decreased appetite constipation dry mouth nausea and vomiting flatulence abnormal results of blood tests (leucopenia) joint pain (arthralgia) musculoskeletal pain joint inflammation (arthritis) numbness and muscle weakness of the hand (carpal tunnel syndrome ) decreased weight abnormal dreams difficulty in muscular coordination (balance disorder) depression dizziness (vertigo) prolonged muscle contractions (dystonia) runny nose (rhinitis) rash or irritation of the skin (dermatitis) rash bloodshot eyes (conjunctivitis) urinary urgency Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Azilect. Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Azilect should not be used during pregnancy or while breast feeding without consultation with your doctor. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rasagiline http://www.azilect.com/ http://www.drugs.com/azilect.html http://www.rxlist.com/azilect-drug.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin