Cabaser, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cabaser - (Cabergoline) You are here: Home Cabaser - (Cabergoline) Cabaser (Cabergoline) is used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease. It is used after your Doctor has tried other treatments that have not worked or for people who are already taking other medicines for this illness to help control other symptoms. Why have I been prescribed Cabaser? Cabaser (Cabergoline) is used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease . It is used after your Doctor has tried other treatments that have not worked or for people who are already taking other medicines for this illness to help control other symptoms. How does it work? The tablets contain the active ingredient Cabergoline which acts in a similar way to a chemical in the body called dopamine. Patients with Parkinson’s Disease do not have enough of this chemical. It helps with control of body movements. When and how do I take it? Cabaser should be taken after food to help reduce the side-effects. What’s the dose? The usual starting dose of Cabaser is 1mg daily. Your doctor may then increase the dose until he finds a suitable dose to control your symptoms. You should not take more than 3mg of Cabaser in one day. Could it interact with other tablets? The effectiveness of Cabaser can be reduced by some medicines, these include: Medicines used to treat mental illness (e.g. phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes), Medicines used to treat sickness (e.g. metoclopramide) Side-effects may be increased by other medicines, these include: Antibiotics (e.g. erythromycin). Drugs used for migraines (e.g. ergotamine). Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Cabaser can cause side-effects, although not everybody gets them. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms. These symptoms can be severe: Very common side effect (affecting more than one person in ten): heart valve and related disorders e.g. inflammation (pericarditis) or leaking of fluid in the pericardium (pericardial effusion). The early symptoms may be: Strong impulse to gamble, despite serious personal or family consequences Increased sexual drive, which is of significant concern to the individual or to others. Other side-effects that may occur are: Feeling sick (nausea), being sick (vomiting), indigestion, stomach pain; Involuntary or uncontrolled movements of the limbs, hallucinations, confusion; Dizziness , drowsiness, suddenly falling asleep; Chest pain ( angina ); Swelling of tissues due to the accumulation of fluid; Severe burning pain and skin redness in the hands and feet, low blood pressure; Decrease in the oxygen carrying pigment of the blood (haemoglobin) and/or decrease in the number of red blood cells in your blood, increased amount of triglycerides, a type of fat in your blood. If any of the side-effects gets serious, or if you notice any side-effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? It is not known if there are any interactions between alcohol and Cabaser. Alcohol should be taken with caution when taking Cabaser. Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Pregnancy: If you are pregnant, think you might be pregnant, or trying to become pregnant, tell your doctor before you take Cabaser. Breast-feeding: Tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding, since this medicine may affect milk production (lactation). If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.drugs.com/uk/cabaser-1mg-tablets-leaflet.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/1479 http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/brain-and-nervous-system/a6345/cabaser-cabergoline/ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cabergoline http://www.nps.org.au/medicines/brain-and-nervous-system/movement-disorder-medicines/cabergoline-movement-disorder-medicines/cabaser-tablets &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Parkinson&#039;s disease Print This Page Health Reference Parkinson&#039;s disease Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin