Doxazosin, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Doxazosin Tablets You are here: Home Doxazosin Tablets Doxazosin is one of a group of medicines called alpha-blockers. It is used to treat high blood pressure, or the symptoms caused by enlargement of the prostate gland in men. Why have I been prescribed Doxazosin? Doxazosin is one of a group of medicines called alpha-blockers. It is used to treat high blood pressure, or the symptoms caused by enlargement of the prostate gland in men. How does it work? Doxazosin is used to treat high blood pressure ( hypertension ), by relaxing blood vessels so that blood passes through them more easily. This helps to lower blood pressure. In patients with an enlarged prostate gland, Doxazosin is taken to treat poor and/or frequent passing of urine. This is common in patients with an enlarged prostate gland. Doxazosin works by relaxing&nbsp;muscle around the bladder exit and prostate gland so urine is passed more easily. When and how do I take it? Swallow your medicine whole with water. Do not chew, divide or crush the tablets. Take your tablets as your doctor told you. It is important to keep taking your tablets. They help to control your blood pressure. Don't change the dose or stop taking the tablets without first checking with your doctor. What’s the dose? The usual dose of Doxazosin is one 4mg modified release tablet taken once a day. Your doctor may wish to increase your dose to 8mg. This is the maximum dose of this medicine. Could it interact with other tablets? There are some medicines that may interact with&nbsp;Doxazosin: Medicines for erectile dysfunction ( impotence ) such as sildenafil, tadalafil or vardenafil. Some patients who take alpha-blocker therapy for the treatment of high blood pressure or prostate enlargement may experience dizziness or light-headedness, which may be caused by low blood pressure upon sitting or standing up quickly. Certain patients have experienced these symptoms when taking drugs for erectile dysfunction (impotence) with alpha-blockers. In order to reduce the likelihood that these symptoms occur, you should be on a regular daily dose of your alpha blocker before you start drugs for erectile dysfunction. Doxazosin may lower your blood pressure even more if you are already taking other medicines to treat high blood pressure . You should always tell your doctor if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicine, even those not prescribed, because they might interact with Doxazosin. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Doxazosin can cause side effects although not everybody gets them. STOP taking&nbsp;Doxazosin&nbsp;and call an ambulance immediately if you experience any of the following: Heart attack Increased, decreased or irregular heartbeat Weakness of arms, legs or problems speaking which may be symptoms of a stroke Allergic reactions (hypersensitivity). Symptoms include sudden wheeziness, tightness in chest, difficulty in breathing, swelling of the face, tongue or throat, rash or itching (especially affecting the whole body) Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms after taking Cardura: Chest pain ( angina ), wheezing, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing Feeling your heartbeat (palpitations) Fainting Yellowing of the skin or the eyes ( jaundice ) Low numbers of white blood cells or blood platelets, which may result in bruising or easy bleeding The following events have been reported in patients being treated with Doxazosin. If any of these side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor. Common side effects: These can affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 patients: dizziness, feeling of spinning or rotation of surroundings (vertigo), headache low blood pressure swelling of feet, ankles or fingers bronchitis, coughing, respiratory tract (nose, throat, lungs) infection nasal stuffiness, sneezing and/or runny nose caused by inflammation of the lining of the nose (rhinitis) stomach/abdominal pains, feeling/being sick urinary tract infection, urinary incontinence (inability to control passing urine) sleepiness, general weakness indigestion, dry mouth itching back pain, painful muscles flu-like symptoms Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Doxazosin. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? The safety of using Doxazosin during pregnancy has not been established. If you are pregnant or trying to become pregnant speak to your doctor, who will decide if Cardura is suitable for you. Do not take Doxazosin&nbsp;if you are breast-feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doxazosin http://www.drugs.com/cdi/cardura-xl-extended-release-tablets.html http://www.rxlist.com/cardura-xl-side-effects-drug-center.htm http://www.medicinenet.com/doxazosin_mesylate/article.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin