Erdotin, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Erdotin You are here: Home Erdotin Erdotin (Erdosteine) is used to treat the symptoms associated with short, severe episodes of worsening of chronic bronchitis. It is also used as an expectorant. Why have I been prescribed Erdotin? Erdotin (Erdosteine) is used to treat the symptoms associated with short, severe episodes of worsening of chronic bronchitis. It is also used as an expectorant. How does it work? Erdotin contains erdosteine, a mucolytic agent, which acts on the phlegm (mucous) in the respiratory tract or airways and breaks it up. When and how do I take it? The capsule must be swallowed whole with a glass of water. What’s the dose? The usual dose is: Elderly patients and adults above 18 years: one capsule (300 mg erdosteine) twice a day. Could it interact with other tablets? Erdotin does not usually interfere with other medicines. However, you should always tell your doctor or pharmacist about all medicines you are taking or planning to take, including any obtained without a prescription. Herbal products should only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Erdotin can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Less than 1 in 1000: can expect to get gastrointestinal undesirable effects. Very rare (less than 1 in 10,000): headache cold and difficulty in breathing taste alterations nausea vomiting stomach pain ( heartburn ) and diarrhoea itching and redness of the skin and eczema If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Erdotin. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine. The use of erdosteine in pregnant or breast-feeding women is not recommended. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.old.health.gov.il/units/pharmacy/trufot/alonim/ERDOTIN_dr_1322978767512.pdf http://patient.info/medicine/erdosteine-capsules-erdotin https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/19276 http://www.drugs.com/uk/erdotin-300-mg-capsules-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Bronchitis Print This Page Health Reference Bronchitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin