Hepatitis C | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Hepatitis C You are here: Home Hepatitis C Hepatitis C is an infection caused by a virus that attacks the liver and leads to inflammation. Most people infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) have no symptoms. What is it? Hepatitis C is an infection caused by a virus that attacks the liver and leads to inflammation. Most people infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) have no symptoms. In fact, most people don't know they have the hepatitis C infection until liver damage shows up, decades later, during routine medical tests. Hepatitis C is one of several hepatitis viruses and is generally considered to be among the most serious of these viruses. Hepatitis C is passed through contact with contaminated blood — most commonly through needles shared during illegal drug use. Symptoms Hepatitis C infection usually produces no signs or symptoms during its earliest stages. When signs and symptoms do occur, they're generally mild and flu-like and may include: Fatigue Fever Nausea or poor appetite Muscle and joint pains Tenderness in the area of your liver Causes Hepatitis C infection is caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV is spread when you come in contact with contaminated blood. Examples of how HCV can be spread include: Blood transfusions and organ transplants before 1992 . Improved blood-screening tests became available in 1992. Before that year, it was possible to unknowingly contract hepatitis C through a blood transfusion or organ transplant. Shared needles . HCV can also spread through sharing contaminated needles when injecting drugs. Childbirth . A small number of babies born to mothers with hepatitis C acquire the infection during childbirth. Sexual contact . In rare cases, HCV may be transmitted sexually. Risk factors Your risk of hepatitis C infection is increased if you: Are a health care worker who has been exposed to infected blood Have ever injected illicit drugs Are HIV-positive Received a piercing or tattoo in an unclean environment using unsterile equipment Received a blood transfusion or organ transplant before 1992 Received clotting factor concentrates before 1987 Received hemodialysis treatments for a long period of time Were born to a woman with a hepatitis C infection Complications Hepatitis C infection that continues over many years can cause significant complications, such as: Scarring of the liver tissue (cirrhosis) . After 20 to 30 years of hepatitis C infection, cirrhosis may occur. Scarring in your liver makes it difficult for your liver to function. Liver cancer . A small number of people with hepatitis C infection may develop liver cancer. Liver failure . A liver that is severely damaged by hepatitis C may be unable to function. Diagnosis Screening healthy people for hepatitis C Testing for hepatitis C infection in people who have a high risk of coming in contact with the virus may help doctors begin treatment or recommend lifestyle changes that may slow liver damage. This is recommended because hepatitis C infection often begins damaging the liver before it causes signs and symptoms. People who may want to talk to their doctors about screening for hepatitis C infection include: Anyone who has ever injected illicit drugs Anyone with unexplained, unusual liver function tests Babies born to mothers with hepatitis C Health care and emergency workers who have been exposed to blood or accidental needle sticks People with hemophilia who were treated with clotting factors before 1987 People who have ever undergone long-term hemodialysis treatments People who received blood transfusions or organ transplants before 1992 Sexual partners of anyone diagnosed with hepatitis C infection Blood tests to diagnose hepatitis C Blood tests may help to: Determine whether you have the hepatitis C virus Measure the quantity of the hepatitis C virus in your blood (viral load) Evaluate the genetic makeup of the virus (genotyping), which helps determine your treatment options Testing samples of liver tissue to determine severity of liver damage Your doctor may also recommend a procedure to remove a small sample of liver tissue for laboratory testing. A liver biopsy can help determine the severity of the disease and guide treatment decisions. During a liver biopsy, your doctor inserts a thin needle through your skin and into your liver to remove the tissue sample.&nbsp; References: http://www.who.int/features/qa/76/en/ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hepatitis http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/145869.php http://www.healthline.com/health/hepatitis https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/hepatitis.html http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/ http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/cfaq.htm Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin