Atenetic, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Atenetic You are here: Home Atenetic Atenetic (Atenolol/Chlorthalidone) tablets are used in the management of hypertension: This is a combination product (contains two drugs) which may be suitable for use when satisfactory control of blood pressure cannot be obtained with either drug is used alone. Why have I been prescribed Atenetic? Atenetic (Atenolol/Chlorthalidone) tablets are used in the management of hypertension . This is a combination product (contains two drugs) which may be suitable for use when satisfactory control of blood pressure cannot be obtained with either drug is used alone. How does it work? Atenetic contains Atenolol which belongs to a family of drugs called Beta-Blockers. Beta-blockers cause a relaxation of the muscles of the heart. This helps to lower high blood pressure (hypertension) and lessens the pains of angina .&nbsp;Beta blockers can also have an effect on the lungs so it is important to tell your doctor if you are asthmatic. It also contains Chlorthalidone which is a diuretic (water tablet). This works by increasing the amount of urine produced by your kidneys, thereby removing excess fluid from your system and lowering blood pressure. When and how do I take it? Usually taken once a day. The tablets should be swallowed whole with some water. What’s the dose? One tablet contains 50mg Atenolol and 12.5mg Chlorthalidone. This is the usually enough for patients. There is a higher strength (100/25mg) which some patients may need. Could they interact with other tablets? Beta blockers may interact with quite a few other drugs: Any other treatment for high blood pressure or irregular heartbeats. This includes water pills (diuretics). Medicines that belong to the group called barbiturates e.g. phenobarabitone, amylobarbitone, quinalbarbitone and butobarbitone. Medicines for diabetes e.g. insulin Medicines for depression or psychological problems e.g. imipramine, chlorpromazine. Indomethacin which can be used to treat rheumatic disease and other disorders of the muscles and skeleton, gout and period pains. Medicines for coughs, colds, hayfever or sinus problems, as these may increase your blood pressure. Medicines that cause muscle relaxation e.g. succinyilcholine. Tubocurarine. If you go into hospital for an operation, tell the hospital staff that you are taking Atenetic. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Atenetic may occasionally cause some unwanted effects: Effects on Heart and Circulation: low blood pressure (hypotension), slow heart beat, fainting, irregular heart beat, worsening of cardiac insufficiency. Worsening of angina attacks in patients with angina pectoris. Worsening of arterial diseases such as Raynaud’s syndrome. Effects on Respiratory System (breathing): Breathlessness in patients with bronchospastic disease. Effects on the Digestive System: Common: feeling or being sick, constipation and diarrhoea (these events usually stop after a short period of time). Effects on the Nervous System: Tiredness, dizziness , headache, visual disturbances, sweating, drowsiness, confusion, hallucinations, psychosis, nightmares, increased dream activity, sleep disturbances, feeling low, pins and needles, cold sensations in the fingers or toes. Effects on Reproductive System: Reduced libido (desire for sexual activity), impotence . Effects on Body Chemicals: In patients with an over active thyroid, the signs of thyroid excess (e.g. tremor, fast heart beat) may not be as noticeable. Effects on the Immune System: Allergic skin reactions (red, itchy or scaling of the skin) Effects on Metabolism and Nutrition: Diabetes in patients prone to the disease or worsening of diabetes . Raised blood sugar levels (the signs of this, for example tremor and fast heart beat, may not be noticed when taking Atenetic). Possible changes in your cholesterol levels. If you have kidney or liver problems your doctor should monitor you carefully during treatment with Atenetic. Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you experience these or any other troublesome side effects. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Drinking alcohol can increase the effects of Atenetic. You will be more likely to suffer&nbsp;from side effects such as feeling dizzy or drowsy. Always ask your doctor or pharmacist first because this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? The tablets should not be given during pregnancy and when breastfeeding, unless the potential benefits outweigh the risks. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atenolol/chlorthalidone https://www.hpra.ie/homepage/medicines/medicines-information/find-a-medicine/results/item?pano=PA0405/031/002&amp;t=ATENETIC&amp;spcpara=3.0 http://www.drugs.com/international/atenetic.html http://www.medicines.ie/documentNotFound.aspx?documentid=9022 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page More Videos... What is Angina Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin