Actrapid, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas. Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Actrapid You are here: Home Actrapid Actrapid is human insulin to treat diabetes. Actrapid is a fast-acting insulin. This means that it will start to lower your blood sugar about half an hour after you take it, and the effect will last for approximately 8 hours. Actrapid is often given in combination with longer-acting insulin products Why have I been prescribed Actrapid? Actrapid is human insulin to treat diabetes . Actrapid is a fast-acting insulin. This means that it will start to lower your blood sugar about half an hour after you take it, and the effect will last for approximately 8 hours. Actrapid is often given in combination with longer-acting insulin products. How does it work? Insulin increases the uptake and utilisation of glucose (sugar) into cells, thereby reducing the amount left in the blood. When and how do I take it? Actrapid is for injection under the skin (subcutaneously). Always vary the sites you inject, to avoid lumps. The best places to give yourself an injection are: the front of your waist (abdomen); your buttocks; the front of your thighs or upper arms. Your insulin will work more quickly if you inject it around the waist. Actrapid vials are for use with insulin syringes with the corresponding unit scale. Actrapid may also be administered intravenously in special situations by medical professionals. To inject Actrapid on its own: Draw air into the syringe, in the same amount as the dose of insulin you need Inject the air into the vial: push the needle through the rubber stopper and press the plunger Turn the vial and syringe upside down Draw the right dose of insulin into the syringe Pull the needle out of the vial Make sure there is no air left in the syringe: point the needle upwards and push the air out Check you have the right dose Inject straight away. To mix Actrapid with long-acting insulin: Roll the vial of long-acting insulin between your hands. Do this until the liquid is uniformly white and cloudy Draw as much air into the syringe as the dose of long-acting insulin you need. Inject the air into the long-acting insulin vial, then pull out the needle Draw as much air into the syringe as the dose of Actrapid you need. Inject the air into the Actrapid vial. Then turn the vial and syringe upside down Draw the right dose of Actrapid into the syringe. Pull the needle out of the vial. Make sure there is no air left in the syringe: point the needle upwards and push the air out.&nbsp;Check the dose Now push the needle into the vial of long-acting insulin Then turn the vial and syringe upside down Draw the right dose of long-acting insulin into the syringe Pull the needle out of the vial Make sure there is no air left in the syringe, and check the dose Inject the mixture straight away. Always mix fast-acting and long-acting insulin in this order. Inject the insulin under the skin. Use the injection technique advised by your doctor or&nbsp;diabetes nurse. Keep the needle under your skin for at least 6 seconds to make sure that the full dose has been delivered. Eat a meal or snack containing carbohydrates within 30 minutes of the injection. It is recommended that you measure your blood glucose regularly. What’s the dose? Novomix dosing is individual and determined in accordance with the needs of the patient. It should normally be given at least once a day. Blood glucose monitoring and insulin dose adjustments are recommended to achieve optimal glycaemic control. Could it interact with other tablets? A number of medicinal products are known to interact with the glucose metabolism. The following substances may reduce the patient's insulin requirements: Oral antidiabetic medicinal products monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) beta-blockers angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors salicylates anabolic steroids and sulphonamides. The following substances may increase the patient's insulin requirements: Oral contraceptives thiazides glucocorticoids thyroid hormones sympathomimetics growth hormone and danazol. Beta-blocking agents may mask the symptoms of hypoglycaemia Octreotide/lanreotide may both increase or decrease insulin requirement Alcohol may intensify or reduce the hypoglycaemic effect of insulin . Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effec &nbsp; ts? The most common side effect is hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar levels). Omission of a meal or unplanned strenuous physical exercise may lead to hypoglycaemia. Possible symptoms of hypoglycaemia include: headache ravenous hunger nausea vomiting lassitude sleepiness disordered sleep restlessness aggressiveness impaired concentration alertness and reaction time depression confusion speech and visual disorders aphasia tremor paresis sensory disturbances dizziness helplessness loss of self-control delirium cerebral convulsions somnolence and loss of consciousness up to and including coma shallow respiration and bradycardia In addition, signs of adrenergic counter-regulation may be present such as: sweating clammy skin anxiety tachycardia hypertension palpitations angina pectoris cardiac arrhythmias. Symptoms can almost always be promptly controlled by immediate intake carbohydrates (sugar). Artificial sweeteners have no effect. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? If you are drinking alcohol your need for insulin may change as your blood sugar level may either rise or fall. Careful monitoring is recommended. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Actrapid may be used during pregnancy and while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. &nbsp; References: https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actrapid https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/3513/SPC/Actrapid+100+IU+ml,+Solution+for+Injection+in+a+vial/ http://www.drugs.com/uk/actrapid.html http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/000424/WC500021658.pdf http://www.novonordisk.com.au/content/dam/australia/affiliate/www-novonordisk-au/Health%20Care%20Professionals/Documents/Actrapid%2025%208%202011.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin