Baby Acne | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Baby Acne You are here: Home Baby Acne Baby acne is acne on a newborn&#039;s skin, usually on the cheeks, chin and forehead. Baby acne isn&#039;t pretty, but it&#039;s common — and temporary. What is it? Baby acne is acne on a newborn's skin, usually on the cheeks, chin and forehead. Baby acne isn't pretty, but it's common — and temporary. There's little you can do to prevent baby acne. The best treatment is usually none at all. Symptoms Baby acneBaby acne is usually characterized by small red bumps or pustules on a baby's cheeks, chin and forehead. It often develops within the first three to four weeks after birth. Baby acne may look worse when your baby is fussy or crying. Many babies also develop tiny white bumps on the nose, chin or cheeks. These are known as milia. Causes Baby acne is usually caused by hormonal changes that occurred during the mother's pregnancy. Baby acne is more common in boys. Rarely, baby acne is a sign of a hormonal problem. Diagnosis Baby acne is easily spotted on a baby's skin. No specific testing is needed. Treatments and drugs Because baby acne typically disappears on its own within several weeks, no medical treatment is usually recommended. In some cases, however, baby acne lingers for months or even longer. If your baby's acne is particularly stubborn, your baby's doctor may recommend a medicated cream or other treatment. Rarely, any underlying conditions may need to be treated as well. Lifestyle remedies In the meantime: Keep your baby's face clean. Routinely wash your baby's face with warm water two or three times a day. For babies with acne, use a mild moisturizing facial soap several times a week and rinse with warm water. Dry your baby's face gently. Simply pat your baby's skin dry. Don't pinch or scrub the acne. You may cause more irritation or an infection.Avoid using lotions or oils on your baby's skin. References: http://patient.info/health/erythema-toxicum-neonatorum-leaflet http://www.babycenter.com/0_baby-acne_72.bc http://www.healthline.com/health/childrens-health/baby-acne http://www.mummypages.ie/how-do-i-treat-baby-acne http://www.drgreene.com/qa-articles/what-baby-acne/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin