Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Daonil Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Daonil You are here: Home Daonil Doctors prescribe Daonil (Daonil) to treat diabetes type 2 which does not respond to dietary measures and which generally only occurs in adults. The tablets lower the sugar content in your blood if this is too high. Why have I been prescribed Daonil? Doctors prescribe Daonil (Daonil) to treat diabetes type 2 which does not respond to dietary measures and which generally only occurs in adults. The tablets lower the sugar content in your blood if this is too high. How does it work? Daonil stimulate the release of insulin from the pancreas which increases glucose uptake and reduces the amount in the blood. When and how do I take it? Unless your doctor has told you differently, take your tablets with or immediately before breakfast or the first main meal of the day. Swallow them with a glass of water. A physician should be consulted in the event that a dose has not been taken at the prescribed time, a meal has been skipped or an extra dose has been taken. It is very important not to skip meals after the tablets have been taken. What’s the dose? The usual dose to take is 5mg daily, but your doctor may advise you to increase this by&nbsp;weekly adjustments with 2.5mg or 5mg Daonil until your blood sugar is under&nbsp;control. Could it interact with other tablets? Daonil may react with the following drugs: Insulin and other oral antidiabetics ACE inhibitors anabolic steroids and male sex hormones chloramphenicol coumarin derivatives cyclophosphamide disopyramide fenfluramine fenyramidol fibrates fluoxetine ifosfamide MAO inhibitors miconazole para-aminosalicyclic acid pentoxifylline phenylbutazone azapropazone oxyphenbutazone probenecid quinolones salicylates sulfinpyrazone sulfonamides sympatholytic agents such as beta-blockers and guanethidine clarithromycin tetracyclines tritoqualine trosfosfamide Weakening of the blood-glucose-lowering effect and, therefore, raised blood glucose levels may occur when taking other drugs, including: Acetazolamide barbiturates corticosteroids diazoxide diuretics epinephrine and other sympathomimetic agents glucagon laxatives nicotinic acid oestrogens and progestogens phenothiazines phenytoin thyroid hormones rifampicin H2-receptor antagonists, clonadine, and resperine may lead to either potentiation or weakening of the blood-glucose-lowering effect. Under the influence of drugs such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and resperine, the signs of hypoglycaemia may be reduced or absent. Daonil may increase cyclosporine plasma concentration and potentially lead to its increased toxicity. Both acute and chronic alcohol intake may potentiate or weaken the blood glucose lowering action of Daonil in an unpredicted fashion. Daonil may either potentiate or weaken the effect of coumarin derivatives. Bosentan: An increased incidence of elevated liver enzymes was observed in patients receiving Daonil concomitantly with bosentan Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Side-effects to Daonil may include an upset stomach, itchy skin or rash, hypersensitivity to light. Your sight may be affected, but this should soon improve. Tell your doctor if these are bad or if they last for a long time. If you feel ill after&nbsp;taking the tablets, or notice anything unusual or unexpected, tell your doctor. It is important that you know what to do and what symptoms to expect when low&nbsp;blood sugar (hypoglycaemia) occurs as this is a common side effect. Possible symptoms of hypoglycaemia include: headache ravenous hunger nausea vomiting lassitude sleepiness disordered sleep restlessness aggressiveness impaired concentration alertness and reaction time depression confusion speech and visual disorders aphasia tremor paresis sensory disturbances dizziness helplessness loss of self-control delirium cerebral convulsions somnolence and loss of consciousness up to and including coma shallow respiration and bradycardia In addition, signs of adrenergic counter-regulation may be present such as sweating , clammy skin, anxiety , tachycardia , hypertension , palpitations, angina pectoris and cardiac arrhythmias. Symptoms can almost always be promptly controlled by immediate intake carbohydrates (sugar). Artificial sweeteners have no effect. In rare cases your liver may be affected by this medicine making you feel nauseous&nbsp;or you may notice your skin or eyes appear yellowish. In other rare cases you may&nbsp;feel generally weak or faint, breathless on exertion, with a fast heartbeat. You may&nbsp;look very pale or notice some bruising. This product may adversely affect the composition of the blood and your doctor may wish to carry out blood tests in order&nbsp;to monitor your blood picture. Be sure to tell your doctor about any of these symptoms. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Alcohol should be avoided while taking Daonil as it can affect the blood glucose levels in an unpredictable fashion. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Daonil must not be taken during pregnancy or by breastfeeding women. The patient must change over to insulin during pregnancy. Patients planning a pregnancy must inform their physician. It is recommended that such patients change over to insulin. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Semi-daonil http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Daonil.aspx https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glibenclamide http://www.mydr.com.au/medicines/cmis/daonil-tablets &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes - Type 2 , Diabetes , Diabetes - Hyperglycemia , Diabetes - Hypoglycemia , Diabetes - Type 1 , Diabetes - Type 1in Children , Diabetes - Type 2 in Children , Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you , Diabetic coma Print This Page More Videos... Diabetes Treatment Options Diabetes - What you need to know about Type 1 &amp; Type 2 Health Reference Diabetes - Type 2 Diabetes Diabetes - Hyperglycemia Diabetes - Hypoglycemia Diabetes - Type 1 Diabetes - Type 1in Children Diabetes - Type 2 in Children Diabetes - What Lynch&#039;s Pharmacy can do for you Diabetic coma Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin