Aprovel, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Aprovel You are here: Home Aprovel Aprovel (Irbesartan) is used: to treat high blood pressure (essential hypertension) to protect the kidney in patients with high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and evidence of impaired kidney function Why have I been prescribed Aprovel? Aprovel (Irbesartan) is used: to treat high blood pressure (essential hypertension ) to protect the kidney in patients with high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes &nbsp;and evidence of impaired kidney function. How does it work? Aprovel belongs to a class of medicines known as angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Angiotensin II is a substance produced in your body which causes your blood vessels to narrow, thus increasing your blood pressure. Aprovel blocks the effect of angiotensin II so that the blood vessels relax, and your blood pressure is lowered. When and how do I take it? Aprovel is for oral use. Swallow the tablets with a sufficient amount of fluid (e.g. one glass of water). You can take Aprovel with or without food. Try to take your daily dose at about the same time each day. It is important that you continue to take Aprovel until your doctor tells you otherwise. What’s the dose? Patients with high blood pressure: The usual dose is 150 mg once a day. The dose may later be increased to 300 mg (two tablets a day) once daily depending on blood pressure response. Patients with high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes with kidney&nbsp;Disease: In patients with high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes, 300 mg (two tablets a day) once daily is the preferred maintenance dose for the treatment of associated kidney disease. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Aprovel does not usually interact with other medicines. You may need to have blood checks if you take: potassium supplements salt substitutes containing potassium potassium-sparing medicines (such as certain diuretics) medicines containing lithium If you take certain painkillers, called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , the effect of irbesartan may be reduced. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Aprovel can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Some of these effects may be serious and may require medical attention. As with similar medicines, rare cases of allergic skin reactions (rash, urticaria), as well as localised swelling of the face, lips and/or tongue have been reported in patients taking irbesartan. If you get any of these symptoms or get short of breath, stop taking Aprovel and contact your doctor immediately. Very common side effects : If you suffer from high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes with kidney disease, blood tests may show an increased level of potassium. Common side effects: dizziness feeling sick/vomiting fatigue blood tests may show raised levels of an enzyme that measures the muscle and heart function (creatine kinase enzyme) In patients with high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes with kidney disease, dizziness when getting up from a lying or sitting position, low blood pressure when getting up from a lying or sitting position, pain in joints or muscles and decreased levels of a protein in the red blood cells (haemoglobin) were also reported. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Aprovel. However, always ask your doctor/pharmacist if you can drink alcohol as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Aprovel is not recommended during the first trimester of pregnancy and cannot be given during second or third trimesters. Aprovel should not be used while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://patient.info/medicine/irbesartan-an-angiotensin-receptor-blocker-aprovel-ifirmasta-sabervel http://xpil.medicines.org.uk/ViewPil.aspx?DocID=10920 http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/27611/SPC/Aprovel+300mg+film-coated+tablets http://www.diagnosia.com/en/drug/aprovel-150-mg-tablets http://pk.sanofi-aventis.com/products/Aprovel-150mg-new.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension Print This Page Health Reference Hypertension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin