Nail fungus | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Nail fungus You are here: Home Nail fungus An infection of nail fungus occurs when fungi infect one or more of your nails. A nail fungal infection may begin as a white or yellow spot under the tip of your fingernail or toenail. What is it? An infection of nail fungus occurs when fungi infect one or more of your nails. A nail fungal infection may begin as a white or yellow spot under the tip of your fingernail or toenail. As the nail fungus spreads deeper into your nail, it may cause your nail to discolour, thicken and develop crumbling edges — an unsightly and potentially painful problem. An infection with nail fungus may be difficult to treat, and infections may recur. But medications are available to help clear up nail fungus. Symptoms You may have a nail fungal infection — also called onychomycosis— if one or more of your nails are: Thickened Brittle, crumbly or ragged Distorted in shape Dull, with no luster or shine A dark color, caused by debris building up under your nail Infected nails also may separate from the nail bed, a condition called onycholysis. You may feel pain in your toes or fingertips and detect a slightly foul odour. Causes Fungi are microscopic organisms that don't need sunlight to survive. Some fungi have beneficial uses, while others cause illness and infection. Nail fungal infections are typically caused by a fungus that belongs to a group of fungi called dermatophytes. But yeasts and moulds also can be responsible for nail fungal infections. All of these microscopic organisms live in warm, moist environments, including swimming pools and showers. They can invade your skin through tiny invisible cuts or through a small separation between your nail and nail bed. They cause problems only if your nails are continually exposed to warmth and moisture — conditions perfect for the growth and spread of fungi. Infection with nail fungus occurs more in toenails than in fingernails because toenails are often confined in a dark, warm, moist environment inside your shoes — where fungi can thrive. Another reason may be the diminished blood circulation to the toes as compared with the fingers, which makes it harder for your body's immune system to detect and eliminate the infection. Risk factors Nail fungus is more common among older adults for several reasons, including diminished blood circulation and more years of exposure to fungi. Also, nails may grow more slowly and thicken with age, making them more susceptible to infection. Nail fungus tends to affect men more often than it does women, particularly those with a family history of this infection. Other factors that can increase your risk of developing nail fungus include: Perspiring heavily Working in a humid or moist environment Having the skin condition psoriasis Wearing socks and shoes that hinder ventilation and don't absorb perspiration Walking barefoot in damp public places, such as swimming pools, gyms and shower rooms Having athlete's foot (tinea pedis) Having a minor skin or nail injury, a damaged nail or another infection Having diabetes, circulation problems or a weakened immune system Complications Nail fungal infections can be painful and may cause permanent damage to your nails. They may also lead to other serious infections that can spread beyond your feet if you have a suppressed immune system due to medication, diabetes or other conditions. Fungal infections of the nail pose the most serious health risk for people with diabetes and for those with weakened immune systems, such as people with leukemia, AIDS or those who've had an organ transplant. If you have diabetes, your blood circulation and the nerve supply to your feet can become impaired. You're also at greater risk for cellulitis, a potentially serious bacterial skin infection. Therefore, any relatively minor injury to your feet — including a nail fungal infection — can lead to a more serious complication, requiring timely medical care. See your doctor immediately if you suspect nail fungus. Diagnosis Your doctor will likely examine your nails first. To test for fungi, your doctor may scrape some debris from under your nail for analysis. The debris can be examined under a microscope or cultured in a lab to identify what's causing the infection. Other conditions, such as psoriasis, can mimic a fungal infection of the nail. Microorganisms, including yeast and bacteria, also can infect nails. Knowing the cause of your infection helps determine the best course of treatment. References http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Fungal-nail-infection/Pages/Introduction.aspx https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/F/Fungal-nail-infection/Treating-fungal-nail-infection.html http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/nail-fungus/basics/treatment/con-20019319 http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/tc/fungal-nail-infections-treatment-overview Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Sporanox - (Itraconazole) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin