Actonel Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas. Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D You are here: Home Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D The treatment of osteoporosis, even if severe, in postmenopausal women who also need daily calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation as assessed by their doctor. It reduces the risk of spinal and hip fractures. Why have I been prescribed Actonel Plus? The treatment of osteoporosis , even if severe, in postmenopausal women who also need daily calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation as assessed by their doctor. It reduces the risk of spinal and hip fractures. How does it work? Actonel Combi is a combination medicine packed as weekly units each containing 1 tablet of Actonel and 6 sachets of calcium/vitamin D3. Actonel tablets Actonel tablets contain risedronate sodium which belongs to a group of non-hormonal medicines called bisphosphonates. These medicines are used to treat bone diseases. It works directly on your bones to make them stronger and therefore less likely to break. Calcium/vitamin D3 sachets The sachets contain calcium/vitamin D3 effervescent granules which provide the&nbsp;calcium and the vitamin D3 that your body may need to harden new bone. When and how do I take it? Take your Actonel tablet at least 30 minutes before the first food, drink (other than plain water) or other medicine of the day. Actonel tablets Take the tablet whilst you are in an upright position (you may sit or stand) to avoid&nbsp; heartburn . Swallow it with at least one glass (120 ml) of plain water. Swallow it whole. Do not suck or chew it. Do not lie down for 30 minutes after taking your tablet. Calcium/vitamin D3 sachets Pour the content of the sachet into a glass of plain water and stir. Wait until the fizzing has subsided, then drink the solution. What’s the dose? Usual dose:&nbsp;Weekly cycle: Day 1: Actonel tablet (light-orange tablet)&nbsp;Take ONE Actonel tablet once a week.&nbsp;Choose one day of the week that best fits your schedule. This will be your Day 1 of the weekly cycle. Every week, take the Actonel tablet on your chosen Day 1. Days 2 to 7: Calcium/vitamin D3 sachets (effervescent granules).&nbsp;Beginning on the day after the Actonel tablet has been taken, Take ONE sachet of calcium/vitamin D3 granules each day for the next 6 days.&nbsp;Every 7 days start a new weekly box. You should begin a new box by taking the Actonel tablet on your chosen Day 1.&nbsp;Do NOT take your Actonel tablet and the sachet on the same day. Could it interact with other tablets? Actonel tablets Medicines containing one of the following lessen the effect of the Actonel tablet if taken at the same time: calcium magnesium aluminium (for example some indigestion mixtures) iron. Take these medicines at least 30 minutes after your Actonel tablet. Calcium/vitamin D3 sachets Medicines containing calcium/vitamin D3 are known to interfere with the following: digitalis (used to treat heart disorders) tetracycline antibiotics steroids (such as cortisone) sodium fluoride (used to strengthen the tooth enamel) thiazide diuretics (used to remove water from the body by increasing urine production) cholestyramine (used to treat high blood cholesterol levels) laxatives (such as paraffin oil). If you are taking any of the above-mentioned medicines, your doctor will give you further instructions. Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Actonel tablets Stop taking Actonel and contact a doctor immediately if you experience any of the following: Symptoms of a severe allergic reaction such as; Swelling of face, tongue or throat Difficulties in swallowing Hives and difficulties in breathing Severe skin reactions that can include blistering of the skin. Tell your doctor promptly if you experience the following side effects: Eye inflammation, usually with pain, redness and light sensitivity. Bone necrosis of the jaw (osteonecrosis) associated with delayed healing and infection, often following tooth extraction. Symptoms from oesophagus such as pain when you swallow, difficulties in swallowing, chest pain or new or worsened heartburn. However in clinical studies the other side effects that were observed were usually mild and did not cause the patient to stop&nbsp;taking their tablets. Common side effects (less than 1 in 10 but more than 1 in 100 patients): Indigestion, feeling sick, stomach ache, stomach cramps or discomfort, constipation, feelings of fullness, bloating, diarrhoea . Pain in your bones, muscles or joints. Headache . Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There is no known interaction between this medicine and alcohol. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Do NOT take Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D if you may be pregnant, are pregnant or planning to become pregnant. Do NOT take Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D if you are breast-feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risedronic_acid http://www.sanofi.ca/products/en/actonel-plus-calcium.pdf https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/20546 http://www.drugs.com/pro/actonel-with-calcium.html http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/drugs/ced/pdf/risedronate.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Osteoporosis , Paget&#039;s disease of bone Print This Page Health Reference Osteoporosis Paget&#039;s disease of bone Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin