Coversyl Arginine Tablets | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Coversyl Arginine Tablets You are here: Home Coversyl Arginine Tablets Coversyl Arginine (Perindopril) can be used for the following conditions: To treat high blood pressure (hypertension). To treat heart failure. If you have recently had a heart attack (myocardial infarction). Why have I been prescribed Coversyl Arginine? Coversyl Arginine (Perindopril) can be used for the following conditions: To treat high blood pressure ( hypertension ). To treat heart failure . If you have recently had a heart attack ( myocardial infarction ). How does it work? Coversyl Arginine belongs to the group of medicines called Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors. ACE inhibitors work by helping to widen your blood vessels , which then make it easier for your heart to pump blood through them. When and how do I take it? Swallow the tablet with a drink of water. Try to take your tablets at the same time each&nbsp;day. It is preferable to take it in the morning before a meal . Keep taking Coversyl Arginine for as long as your doctor tells you to, it is a long term treatment. It is important to keep taking Coversyl Arginine every day. Taking your first dose: Take special care when you have your first dose of Coversyl Arginine or if your dose is increased. It may cause a greater fall in blood pressure than later doses. This may make you feel dizzy or light-headed. If this happens, it may help to lie down. If you are concerned, please talk to your doctor as soon as possible. What’s the dose? Hypertension: The recommended starting dose is 5 mg given once daily in the morning. The dose may be increased to 10 mg once daily after one month of treatment. In elderly patients treatment may be initiated at a dose of 2.5 mg which may be progressively increased to 5 mg after one month then to 10 mg if necessary depending on renal function. Symptomatic heart failure: It is recommended that COVERSYL ARGININE, be introduced under close medical supervision with a recommended starting dose of 2.5 mg taken in the morning. This dose may be increased after 2 weeks to 5 mg once daily if tolerated. The dose adjustment will be based on the response of the individual patient. Stable coronary artery disease: COVERSYL ARGININE is usually introduced at a dose of 5 mg once daily for two weeks, then increased to 10 mg once daily, depending on renal function and provided that the 5 mg dose is well tolerated. Elderly patients may receive 2.5 mg once daily for one week, then 5 mg once daily the next week, before increasing the dose up to 10 mg once daily depending on renal function. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your doctor if you are taking, or have recently taken, any other medicines. This includes medicines that you buy without a prescription. This is because Coversyl Arginine can affect the way some medicines work and some medicines can have an effect on Coversyl Arginine. In particular, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of the following medicines: Other medicines to help lower your blood pressure. Water tablets (diuretic medicines). Medicines to break up blood clots (usually given in hospital). Beta-blocker medicines, such as atenolol and propranolol. Nitrate medicines (for heart problems). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) used to treat pain and arthritis. Aspirin (Acetylsalicylic acid), if you are taking more than 3 grams each day. Medicines for depression and for mental problems, including lithium. Potassium tablets or salt substitutes that have potassium in them. Insulin or medicines that you take by mouth for diabetes. Medicines used to treat asthma . Medicines to treat nose or sinus congestion or other cold remedies (including those you can buy in the pharmacy). Medicines to suppress the body’s immune response (immunosuppressants). Allopurinol (for gout ). Procainamide (for heart beat problems). Medicines that contain gold, such as sodium aurothiomalate, which may be given to you&nbsp;as an injection. What are the possible risks or side-effects? If you experience any of the following reactions, stop taking Coversyl Arginine and see your doctor immediately: Severe allergic reactions. The signs may include sudden onset of: Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat. This may make it difficult to swallow. Severe or sudden swelling of your hands, feet and ankles. Difficulty breathing. Severe itching of the skin (with raised lumps). Severe skin disorders, like a sudden, unexpected rash or burning, red or peeling skin (very rare, affects less than 1 user in 10,000). An infection with symptoms such as fever and serious deterioration of your general condition, or fever with local infection symptoms such as sore throat/pharynx/mouth or urinary problems (very rare, affects less than 1 user in 10,000). Other possible side effects: Common (affects 1 to 10 users in 100): Headache. Feeling dizzy or light-headed, especially if you stand up quickly. Diarrhoea. A dry cough that does not go away. Being sick (vomiting Kidney problems (shown in a blood test). While taking 'Coversyl Arginine', if you develop any of the following symptoms you should let you doctor know immediately: 1. jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes). 2. a dry cough which is persistent for a long time. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? If you drink alcohol while taking 'Coversyl Arginine', it may cause your blood pressure to drop and you may experience dizziness , light-headedness or faintness. You should also keep your alcohol intake to a minimum. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? The use of ACE inhibitors is not recommended during the first trimester of pregnancy. They cannot be used during the second and third trimester of pregnancy. The use of Coversyl Arginine is not recommended while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perindopril http://www.medbroadcast.com/drug/getdrug/Coversyl http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Coversyl.aspx https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2144192.PPA0465_067_005.47946469-e853-4036-814e-81fbb03bafb0.000001Coversyl%2010mg%20PIL.140729.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin