Miscarriage | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Miscarriage You are here: Home Miscarriage Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy before the 20th week. About 10 to 20 percent of known pregnancies end in miscarriage. But the actual number is probably much higher because many miscarriages occur so early in pregnancy that a woman doesn&#039;t even know she&#039;s pregnant. What is it? Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy before the 20th week. About 10 to 20 percent of known pregnancies end in miscarriage. But the actual number is probably much higher because many miscarriages occur so early in pregnancy that a woman doesn't even know she's pregnant. Most miscarriages occur because the fetus isn't developing normally. Miscarriage is a relatively common experience — but that doesn't make it any easier. Ending a pregnancy without a baby to hold in your arms is heartbreaking. Take a step toward emotional healing by understanding what can cause a miscarriage, what increases the risk and what medical care might be needed. Symptoms Most miscarriages occur before the 12th week of pregnancy. Signs and symptoms include: Vaginal spotting or bleeding (although spotting or bleeding in early pregnancy is fairly common) Pain or cramping in your abdomen or lower back Fluid or tissue passing from your vagina Keep in mind that spotting or bleeding in early pregnancy is fairly common. In most cases, women who experience light bleeding in the first trimester go on to have successful pregnancies. Sometimes even heavier bleeding doesn't result in miscarriage. Some women who miscarry develop an infection in their uterus. If you experience this infection, also called a septic miscarriage, you may then also experience: Fever Chills Body aches Vaginal discharge that's thick and has a foul odor Causes Usually abnormal genes or chromosomes Most miscarriages occur because the fetus isn't developing normally. Problems with the baby's genes or chromosomes are typically the result of errors that occur by chance as the embryo divides and grows — not problems inherited from the parents. Some examples of abnormalities include: Blighted ovum . Blighted ovum is common — the cause of about half of all miscarriages that occur in the first 12 weeks. It occurs when a fertilized egg develops a placenta and membrane but no embryo. Intrauterine fetal demise . In this situation the embryo is present but has died before any symptoms of pregnancy loss have occurred. This situation may also be due to genetic abnormalities within the embryo. Molar pregnancy . A molar pregnancy, also called gestational trophoblastic disease, is less common, occurring in about one in 1,000 pregnancies. It is an abnormality of the placenta caused by a problem at fertilisation. In a molar pregnancy, the early placenta develops into a fast-growing mass of cysts in the uterus. This mass may or may not contain an embryo. If it does contain an embryo, the embryo will not reach maturity. Sometimes a mother's health conditions In a few cases, a mother's health condition may lead to miscarriage. Examples include: Uncontrolled diabetes Thyroid disease Infections Hormonal problems Uterus or cervix problems What does NOT cause miscarriage Routine activities such as these don't provoke a miscarriage: Exercise Lifting or straining Having sex Working, provided you're not exposed to harmful chemicals Risk factors Various factors increase the risk of miscarriage, including: Age . Women older than age 35 have a higher risk of miscarriage than do younger women. At age 35, you have about a 20 percent risk. At age 40, the risk is about 40 percent. And at age 45, it's about 80 percent. Paternal age also may play a role. Some studies indicate that the chance of miscarriage is higher if a woman's partner is age 35 or older, with the chance increasing as men age. More than two previous miscarriages . The risk of miscarriage is higher in women with a history of two or more previous miscarriages. After one miscarriage, your risk of miscarriage is the same as that of a woman who's never had a miscarriage. Chronic conditions . Women with certain chronic conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid disease, have a higher risk of miscarriage. Uterine or cervical problems . Certain uterine abnormalities or a weak or unusually short cervix may increase the risk of miscarriage. Smoking, alcohol and illicit drugs . Women who smoke or drink alcohol during pregnancy have a greater risk of miscarriage than do nonsmokers and women who avoid alcohol during pregnancy. Illicit drug use also increases the risk of miscarriage. Invasive prenatal tests . Some prenatal genetic tests, such as chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis, carry a slight risk of miscarriage. Diagnosis Your doctor may do a variety of tests: Pelvic exam . Your doctor will check to see if your cervix has begun to dilate. Ultrasound . This helps your doctor check for a fetal heartbeat and determine if the embryo is developing normally. Blood tests . If you've miscarried, measurements of the pregnancy hormone, beta HCG, can be useful in determining if you've completely passed all placental tissue. Tissue tests . If you have passed tissue, it can be sent to the laboratory to confirm that a miscarriage has occurred — and that your symptoms aren't related to another cause of pregnancy bleeding. Possible diagnoses include: Threatened miscarriage . If you're bleeding but your cervix hasn't begun to dilate, you're having a threatened miscarriage. Such pregnancies often proceed without any further problems. Inevitable miscarriage . If you're bleeding, your uterus is contracting and your cervix is dilated, a miscarriage is inevitable. Incomplete miscarriage . If you pass some of the fetal or placental material but some remains in your uterus, it's considered an incomplete miscarriage. Missed miscarriage . The placental and embryonic tissues remain in the uterus, but the embryo has died or was never formed. Complete miscarriage . If you have passed all the pregnancy tissues, it's considered a complete miscarriage. This is common for miscarriages occurring before 12 weeks. Septic miscarriage . If you develop an infection in your uterus, it's known as a septic miscarriage. This can be a very severe infection and demands immediate care. References http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/pregnancy-loss-miscarriage/basics/definition/con-20033827 http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Miscarriage/Pages/Introduction.aspx https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/M/Miscarriage/ http://www.irishhealth.com/article.html?id=669 Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin