Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Baclofen Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Baclofen Tablets You are here: Home Baclofen Tablets Baclofen tablets, syrup and intrathecal injections all contain the active ingredient baclofen, which is a muscle relaxant medicine. What is it used for? Relief from rigidity, tension and stiffness in muscles (spasticity) that are due to conditions such as: Multiple sclerosis. Tumours in the spinal cord. Motor neurone disease. An injury of the neck or back causing serious damage to the nerves contained within the spinal cord (traumatic partial section). Stroke. Cerebral palsy. Head injury. How does it work? Baclofen tablets, syrup and intrathecal injections all contain the active ingredient baclofen, which is a muscle relaxant medicine.&nbsp; Baclofen is used to relax muscle spasms that cause muscles to become rigid, painful or weak and prevent the muscles being used voluntarily. Examples include muscle spasm and rigidity in multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy and following a stroke. In situations such as these the muscle problems stem from damage to the nerves in the brain or spinal cord. Baclofen is thought to work by binding to receptors in the spinal cord called GABA-B receptors. The effect of this is to 'damp down' the nerve signals that are carried in the spinal cord to the muscles. This reduces the contraction and tension in the muscles. In conditions where there is painful or disabling muscle spasm, baclofen can help to reduce stiffness and enable people to undergo rehabilitation that increases their mobility. How do I take it ? Baclofen tablets and syrup should be taken with or after food or a milky drink. The dose prescribed and how often the medicine needs to be taken depends on the condition being treated. You will be started on a low dose, which is gradually increased after a period of two weeks. This medicine is usually taken in three divided doses per a day. The dose of baclofen will depend on your symptoms are how well you respond to the lowest starting dose. The dosage will be gradually increased until an improvement in your symptoms is seen. Use with caution in Elderly people. Decreased kidney function. Decreased liver function. Disease affecting the airways or lungs (respiratory disease). People with difficulty passing urine due to increased tone in the urinary sphincter muscle. Diabetes. Epilepsy. Stroke. People who have previously had peptic ulcer disease. Psychotic disorders. Schizophrenia. Depression. Manic depression. People suffering from confusion. Parkinson's disease. Not to be used in Peptic ulcer. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine is not recommended for use in pregnancy, particularly in the first trimester, unless considered essential by your doctor. Seek medical advice from your doctor. The medicine passes into the breast milk, but at normal doses it is unlikely to harm the baby. Discuss with your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Very common (affect more than 1 in 10 people) Drowsiness. Nausea. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Disturbances of the gut, such as nausea, vomiting, constipation or diarrhoea, Headache. Confusion. Lightheadedness. Difficulty sleeping (insomnia). Dizziness. Slow, shallow breathing (respiratory depression). Dry mouth. Tremor. Muscle weakness. False perceptions of things that are not really there (hallucinations). Rapid involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus). Visual disturbances. Low blood pressure. Increased need to pass urine. Excessive sweating. Rash. Rare (affect between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10000 people) Sensation of pins and needles. Unpleasant taste. Abdominal pain. Retention of urine. Impotence (erectile dysfunction). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. If baclofen is taken with alcohol or other medicines that cause drowsiness, increased drowsiness is likely. Medicines that can cause drowsiness include the following: opiate painkillers, eg morphine, codeine benzodiazepines, eg diazepam sedating antihistamines, eg chlorphenamine sleeping tablets. If baclofen is taken with tricyclic antidepressants, such as imipramine, severe muscular weakness may possibly occur. Baclofen can lower blood pressure, hence if it is taken by people taking blood pressure lowering medicines (antihypertensives) this effect is likely to be increased. If you are receiving medicines for high blood pressure your doctor may want to decrease your doses to avoid your blood pressure falling too low. If baclofen is taken in combination with levodopa(for Parkinson's disease) side effects such as confusion, hallucinations, headache and nausea may occur. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/aches-and-pains/a7011/lioresal-baclofen/ http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/4113/SPC/Lioresal+Tablets+10mg/ https://www.drugs.com/cdi/lioresal.html http://www.medicinenet.com/baclofen/article.htm http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Lioresal-Tablets.aspx &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Multiple sclerosis , Cerebral Palsy Print This Page Health Reference Multiple sclerosis Cerebral Palsy Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin