Nausea & Vomiting | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Nausea &amp; Vomiting You are here: Home Nausea &amp; Vomiting Nausea and vomiting are common symptoms that can be caused by numerous conditions. Nausea and vomiting most often are due to viral gastroenteritis — often mistakenly termed &quot;stomach flu&quot; — or the morning sickness of early pregnancy. Definition Nausea and vomiting are common symptoms that can be caused by numerous conditions. Nausea and vomiting most often are due to viral gastroenteritis — often mistakenly termed "stomach flu" — or the morning sickness of early pregnancy. Many medications can cause nausea and vomiting, as can general anesthesia for surgery. Rarely, nausea and vomiting may indicate a serious or even life-threatening problem. Causes Nausea and vomiting may occur separately or together. Common causes include: Chemotherapy Gastroparesis (a condition in which the muscles of the stomach wall don't function properly, interfering with digestion) General anesthesia Intestinal obstruction Motion sickness: First aid Morning sickness Migraine Rotavirus Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu) Vestibular neuritis Other possible causes of nausea and vomiting include: Alcohol use disorder Anaphylaxis (in children) Anorexia nervosa Appendicitis Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) Brain tumor (both cancerous and noncancerous) Bulimia nervosa Concussion Cholecystitis Cholecystitis (gallbladder inflammation) Cyclic vomiting syndrome Depression (major depressive disorder) Dizziness Diabetic ketoacidosis Ear infection (middle ear) Food poisoning Generalized anxiety disorder GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) Hiatal hernia Heart failure Gallstones Fever (in children) Hydrocephalus (a congenital brain abnormality) Hyperparathyroidism (overactive parathyroid) Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) Hypoparathyroidism (underactive parathyroid) Intestinal ischemia Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) Intracranial hematoma Intussusception (in children) Duodenitis (inflammation of the initial portion of the small intestine) Liver cancer Liver failure Medications (including aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, oral contraceptives, digitalis, narcotics and antibiotics) Meniere's disease Meningitis Milk allergy (in infants and children) Pancreatic cancer Pancreatitis Peptic ulcer Pseudotumor cerebri Pyloric stenosis (in infants) Radiation therapy Severe pain Traumatic brain injury When to see a doctor Seek prompt medical attention if nausea and vomiting are accompanied by other warning signs, such as: Chest pain Severe abdominal pain or cramping Blurred vision Fainting Confusion Cold, clammy, pale skin High fever and stiff neck Fecal material or fecal odor in the vomit Seek immediate medical attention Ask someone to drive you to urgent care or an emergency room if: Nausea and vomiting are accompanied by pain or a severe headache, especially if you haven't had this type of headache before You're unable to eat or drink for 12 hours or your child hasn't been able to keep liquids down for eight hours You have signs or symptoms of dehydration — excessive thirst, dry mouth, infrequent urination, dark-colored urine and weakness, dizziness or lightheadedness upon standing Your vomit contains blood, resembles coffee grounds or is green Make an appointment with your doctor if: Vomiting lasts more than two days for adults, 24 hours for children under age 2 or 12 hours for infants You've had bouts of nausea and vomiting for longer than one month You've experienced unexplained weight loss along with nausea and vomiting Take self-care measures while you wait for your appointment with your doctor: Take it easy . Too much activity and not getting enough rest might make nausea worse. Stay hydrated. Take small sips of cold, clear, carbonated or sour drinks, such as ginger ale, lemonade and water. Mint tea also may help. Avoid strong odors and other triggers. Food and cooking smells, perfume, smoke, stuffy rooms, heat, humidity, flickering lights, and driving are among the possible triggers of nausea and vomiting. Eat bland foods. Start with easily digested foods such as gelatin, crackers and toast. When you can keep these down, try cereal, rice, fruit, and salty or high-protein, high-carbohydrate foods. Avoid fatty or spicy foods. Wait to eat solid foods until about six hours after the last time you vomited. Use over-the-counter (OTC) motion sickness medicines. If you're planning a trip, OTC motion sickness drugs, such as Stugeron or Kwells Travel Sickness tablets, may help calm your queasy stomach.&nbsp; If your queasiness stems from pregnancy, try nibbling on some crackers before you get out of bed in the morning. References: https://patient.info/doctor/persistent-nausea-or-vomiting http://www.webmd.com/digestive-disorders/digestive-diseases-nausea-vomiting#1 http://www.healthline.com/health/nausea-and-vomiting http://www.medicinenet.com/nausea_and_vomiting/article.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Motilium Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin