Kidney cancer | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Kidney cancer You are here: Home Kidney cancer Kidney cancer is cancer that originates in the kidneys. Your kidneys are two bean-shaped organs, each about the size of your fist. They&#039;re located behind your abdominal organs, with one kidney on each side of your spine. What is it? Kidney cancer is cancer that originates in the kidneys. Your kidneys are two bean-shaped organs, each about the size of your fist. They are located behind your abdominal organs, with one kidney on each side of your spine. In adults, the most common type of kidney cancer is renal cell carcinoma. Other less common types of kidney cancer can occur. Transitional cell carcinoma, which affects the ureters, can also begin in the kidneys. Children are more likely to develop a kind of kidney cancer called Wilms' tumor. The incidence of kidney cancer seems to be increasing, though it isn't clear why. Many kidney cancers are detected during procedures for other diseases or conditions. Imaging techniques such as computerized tomography (CT) are being used more often, which may lead to the discovery of more kidney cancers. Symptoms Kidney cancer rarely causes signs or symptoms in its early stages. In the later stages, kidney cancer signs and symptoms may include: Blood in your urine, which may appear pink, red or cola colored Back pain just below the ribs that doesn't go away Weight loss Fatigue Intermittent fever Causes It's not clear what causes renal cell carcinoma. Doctors know that kidney cancer begins when some kidney cells acquire mutations in their DNA. The mutations tell the cells to grow and divide rapidly. The accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor that can extend beyond the kidney. Some cells can break off and spread (metastasize) to distant parts of the body. Risk factors Factors that can increase the risk of kidney cancer include: Older age . Your risk of kidney cancer increases as you age. Being male . Men are more likely to develop kidney cancer. Smoking . Smokers have a greater risk of kidney cancer than nonsmokers do. The risk decreases after you quit. Obesity . People who are obese have a higher risk of kidney cancer than do people who are considered average weight. High blood pressure ( hypertension ) . High blood pressure increases your risk of kidney cancer, but it isn't clear why. Chemicals in your workplace . Workers who are exposed to certain chemicals on the job may have a higher risk of kidney cancer. People who work with chemicals such as asbestos and cadmium may have an increased risk of kidney cancer. Treatment for kidney failure . People who receive long-term dialysis to treat chronic kidney failure have a greater risk of developing kidney cancer. Von Hippel-Lindau disease . People with this inherited disorder are likely to develop several kinds of tumors, including, in some cases, kidney cancer. Hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma . Having this inherited condition makes it more likely you'll develop one or more kidney cancers. Diagnosis Diagnosing kidney cancer Tests and procedures used to diagnose kidney cancer include: Blood and urine tests . Tests of your blood and your urine may give your doctor clues about what's causing your signs and symptoms. Imaging tests . Imaging tests allow your doctor to visualize a kidney tumor or abnormality. Imaging tests might include ultrasound, computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Removing a sample of kidney tissue (biopsy) . In very selected cases, your doctor may recommend a procedure to remove a small sample of cells (biopsy) from a suspicious area of your kidney. Because surgery is usually the first line treatment for kidney cancer and a kidney biopsy carries the risk of a "false-negative," doctors usually forgo kidney biopsy. Kidney biopsy is typically reserved for cases that are most likely to be noncancerous or for people who can't undergo an operation. Kidney cancer staging Once your doctor diagnoses kidney cancer, the next step is to determine the extent, or stage, of the cancer. Staging tests for kidney cancer may include additional CT scans or other imaging tests your doctor feels are appropriate. Then your doctor assigns a number, called a stage, to your cancer. Kidney cancer stages include: Stage I . At this stage, the tumor can be up to 2 3/4 inches (7 centimeters) in diameter. The tumor is confined to the kidney. Stage II . A stage II kidney cancer is larger than a stage I tumor, but is still confined to the kidney. Stage III . At this stage, the tumor extends beyond the kidney to the surrounding tissue or the adrenal glands, and may also have spread to a nearby lymph node. Stage IV . Cancer spreads outside the kidney, to multiple lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body, such as the bones, brain, liver or lungs.&nbsp; References http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Cancer-of-the-kidney/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://www.medicinenet.com/kidney_cancer/article.htm http://www.webmd.com/cancer/understanding-kidney-cancer http://www.drugs.com/health-guide/kidney-cancer.html http://www.cancer.ie/cancer-information/kidney-cancer#sthash.lw5gQTIa.dpbs Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... What is Lung Cancer? Hair Loss (Alopecia) Avastin-bevacizumab Dexamethasone Tablets Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin