Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Azyter Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Azyter Eye Drops You are here: Home Azyter Eye Drops Azyter eye drops contain the active ingredient azithromycin, which is a type of medicine called macrolide antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. What is Azyter used for? Bacterial infections of the eye that are producing pus in the eye eg bacterial conjunctivitis. Trachomatous conjunctivitis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. How does Azyter work? Azyter eye drops contain the active ingredient azithromycin, which is a type of medicine called macrolide antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Azithromycin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is active against a wide variety of bacteria that cause a wide variety of infections. Azithromycin works by preventing bacteria from producing proteins that are essential to them. Without these proteins the bacteria cannot grow, replicate and increase in numbers. Azithromycin therefore stops the spread of infection and remaining bacteria are killed by the body's immune system or eventually die. Azyter eye drops are administered into the eye to treat purulent (pus-containing) conjunctivitis and trachomatous conjunctivitis that is caused by a type of bacteria called Chlamydia trachomatis. Administering these drops directly into the eye allows the azithromycin to act locally on the bacteria that are causing the infection. How do I use Azyter? Azyter eye drops come in single-dose units. There should be enough in each dose unit to treat both eyes if required. Once you have put the drops in you should throw away the dose unit, even if there is some medicine left in it. Do not save it for later. One drop should be put in the affected eye(s) twice a day, morning and evening for three days. Make sure you complete the course of treatment that your doctor has prescribed, even if your eye appears to be better. Stopping treatment early increases the chance that your symptoms will come back and that any bacteria will grow resistant to the antibiotic. Do not use for longer than three days, even if you still have signs of the infection. The drops have a prolonged action and will keep working after the three day course is finished. Seek medical advice immediately if your symptoms get worse at any point during treatment, or if you think you have developed a new infection. If you forget a dose of Azyter drops, apply the missed dose as soon as you remember, unless it is almost time for your next dose. In this case, leave out the missed dose and continue with the prescribed routine as usual. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed dose. Azyter should not be used in People who are allergic to other macrolide antibiotics. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Although the safety of this medicine during pregnancy has not been fully studied, the manufacturer states that it is not expected to have any harmful effects on a developing baby if used during pregnancy, because the medicine is not significantly absorbed into the bloodstream after putting the drops in the eyes. Azithromycin passes into breast milk when taken by mouth, but the manufacturer states that the low dose used in Azyter eye drops and the insignificant passage of the medicine into the bloodstream means that it is not expected to have any harmful effects on a nursing infant If your doctor prescribes you these eye drops while you are pregnant or breastfeeding, you can further minimise the amount of the medicine that passes into your bloodstream by pressing on your tear duct while you put in the eye drops and for a few minutes after.&nbsp; Possible side effects of Azyter Very common Eye discomfort after putting in the drops (eg itching, stinging, burning or gritty feeling in the eye, irritation). Common Blurred vision. Feeling of sticky eyes. Sensation of something in the eye after putting in the drops. Uncommon Eye allergy, such as inflammation of the membrane covering the eyeball (allergic conjunctivitis). Inflammation of the surface of the eye (keratitis). Swelling, redness or eczema of the eyelid(s). Watery eyes. Hypersensitivity reactions such as narrowing of the airways (bronchospasm), swelling of the lips, throat and tongue (angioedema), severe skin reactions or anaphylactic shock. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can Azyter affect other medicines? If you are using more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least 15 minutes apart, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. You should apply Azyter eye drops last. Azithromycin eye drops and are unlikely to be absorbed into the bloodstream in sufficient quantities to affect medicines that are being taken by mouth. However, you should tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using any other medicines, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine, so they can check that the combination is safe References: https://iovs.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?articleid=2270237 https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eye-care/a8942/azyter-eye-drops-azithromycin/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/4671/pil https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1994738/ https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01089608 https://db.cbg-meb.nl/mri/spc/nlh-0855-001.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Eye Complaints Print This Page Health Reference Eye Complaints Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin