Cocois, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cocois You are here: Home Cocois Cocois scalp ointment contains three active ingredients, coal tar, salicylic acid and precipitated sulfur. What is Cocois scalp ointment used for? Dandruff. Eczema affecting the scalp. Seborrhoeic dermatitis affecting the scalp. Psoriasis affecting the scalp. How does Cocois scalp ointment work? Cocois scalp ointment contains three active ingredients, coal tar, salicylic acid and precipitated sulfur. Coal tar has been used in skin conditions for hundreds of years, but it is still not fully understood how it works, mainly because it is made up of so many different compounds. Coal tar has mild antiseptic and anti-inflammatory effects, and relieves itching. It is also absorbed into the skin cells and is thought to inhibit DNA replication in these cells. This slows down cell division and stops the cells from multiplying excessively. In turn, this reduces thickening and scaling of the skin. Salicylic acid is a type of medicine known as a keratolytic. It works by breaking down keratin, a protein that forms part of the skin structure. This results in the shedding of skin cells from the affected area. Precipitated sulfur has mild antibacterial and antifungal acitivity and also acts as a keratolytic. Cocois ointment also contains coconut oil, which helps to moisturise and soften the skin. The combination of active ingredients help to reduce itching and scaling of the scalp. How do I use Cocois scalp ointment? Cocois scalp ointment should be applied to the affected areas of the scalp and left for one hour before shampooing off. Don't apply the ointment to broken or inflamed areas of skin. Wash your hands after applying the ointment. The ointment should be used once a week when necessary. In more severe cases you can use the ointment once a day for the first three to seven days of treatment, until the skin has improved. If symptoms persist for longer than four weeks despite treatment, you should consult your doctor for advice. Important information about Cocois scalp ointment This ointment is for external use on the scalp only. Avoid getting the ointment in the eyes or inside the nose or mouth. If skin irritation occurs, stop using the ointment and consult your doctor. Cocois ointment may stain fabrics and jewellery. Cocois scalp ointment should be used with caution in Children aged 6 to 12 years. This ointment should only be used in this age group on the advice of a doctor.&nbsp; Cocois scalp ointment should not be used in Children under six years of age. Pustular psoriasis. Broken, inflamed or infected skin on the scalp. People who are allergic to salicylates, eg aspirin. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy and breastfeeding has not been established. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding you should get medical advice from your doctor before using this medicine. Possible side effects of Cocois scalp ointment Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Skin irritation. Acne-like eruptions. Hair loss. Inflammation of the hair follicles (folliculitis). Discolouration of the skin and hair. Abnormal reaction of the skin to light, usually a rash (photosensitivity). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. If you think you have experienced a side effect from a medicine or vaccine you should check the patient information leaflet. This lists the known side effects and what to do if you get them. You can also get advice from your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. If they think it's necessary they'll report it for you. How can Cocois scalp ointment affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you need to use other topical medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin you shouldn't apply them at the same time as Cocois. Wait until after you have washed off the Cocois ointment before applying other products. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6434/cocois-scalp-ointment/ https://www.drugs.com/uk/cocois-ointment-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin