Mosquito bites | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Mosquito bites You are here: Home Mosquito bites Mosquitoes — and mosquito bites — are annoying. What&#039;s worse, mosquito bites sometimes transmit serious diseases, such as West Nile virus, malaria and dengue fever. What is it? Mosquitoes — and mosquito bites — are annoying. What's worse, mosquito bites sometimes transmit serious diseases, such as West Nile virus, malaria and dengue fever. You're most likely to get mosquito bites at dawn or at dusk, when mosquitoes are most active. But, it's not always possible or desirable to stay indoors during those times. Fortunately, you can take steps to keep mosquitoes at bay. However, no method is foolproof. If you do get bitten, the telltale signs and symptoms of mosquito bites — redness, swelling and itching — may not show up for up to two days after you've been bitten. A number of treatments, such as oral antihistamines and topical lotions, can ease the itch from mosquito bites. Symptoms Common signs and symptoms Typical signs and symptoms of mosquito bites include: Soft, initially pale bumps on your skin that can become pink or red Itching The bump that results from a bite can appear immediately or may take up to two days to appear. If you're highly sensitive to mosquito bites, you may have a much larger area of itching. Severe allergic reaction Rarely, a serious reaction to mosquito bites might occur, which results in swelling in the throat, significant hives and wheezing. This life-threatening condition ( anaphylaxis ) requires immediate medical attention. Mosquito-borne disease Mosquitoes can transmit serious diseases such as West Nile virus, malaria, yellow fever and dengue fever. Signs and symptoms of a more serious infection may include: Fever Severe headache Neurological changes, such as one-sided muscle weakness Body aches Nausea Vomiting Swollen glands Rash Lethargy Confusion Sensitivity to light Causes Mosquito bites are caused by the bite of a female mosquito. The female mosquito feeds off your blood by piercing your skin with her mouth (proboscis). While sucking your blood, she also deposits some of her saliva into your skin. This saliva contains proteins that remain in your skin. Your immune system may then react to those proteins, resulting in the characteristic itching and bump. Risk factors Mosquitoes select their victims by evaluating scent, exhaled carbon dioxide and the chemicals in a person's sweat. A few factors may put you at greater risk of getting bitten. Although it's not clear why, mosquitoes are more likely to bite: Men People with type O blood Overweight people In addition, mosquitoes are attracted to heat. So, wearing dark colors, which absorb heat, may attract mosquitoes. Age can affect symptom severity Adults may become less sensitized to mosquito bites if bitten many times throughout life. This means adults are less likely to have strong reactions to mosquito bites. Children who haven't been bitten as much are at greater risk of experiencing symptoms from a mosquito bite. Complications Infected bites . If you scratch mosquito bites, any resulting sores could become infected. Mosquito-borne diseases . Mosquitoes can act as reservoirs of diseases such as West Nile virus, malaria, yellow fever and dengue fever. The mosquito obtains a virus by biting an infected person or animal. Then, when biting you, the mosquito can transfer that virus to you through its saliva. Severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) . Although rare, a serious reaction to mosquito bites might occur, which can result in swelling in your throat, significant hives and wheezing. This requires immediate medical attention. Diagnosis If you have an infection at the site of your bite, your doctor can diagnose this by looking at it. If you've contracted an illness from a mosquito bite, your signs and symptoms are usually enough for your doctor to diagnose the illness, but a blood sample may sometimes be taken to confirm the diagnosis. For some complications, including meningitis or neurological changes that occur after exposure to mosquitoes, additional tests, such as a spinal fluid examination, may be needed. References http://www.healthline.com/health/allergies/mosquito-bite http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mosquito-bites/basics/definition/con-20032350 http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/illnesses-mosquito-bites &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Loratadine Tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin