Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Dermovate Scalp Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dermovate Scalp Application You are here: Home Dermovate Scalp Application Dermovate is used to help reduce the redness and itchiness of certain scalp problems in adults, the elderly and children over the age of 1 year. These include frequently relapsing dermatoses and psoriasis (thickened patches of inflamed, red skin, often covered by silvery scales) that have not responded to milder steroid creams, ointments, lotions or scalp applications. What is Dermovate scalp application used for? Eczema affecting the scalp. Psoriasis affecting the scalp. How does Dermovate scalp application work? Dermovate scalp application contains the active ingredient clobetasol propionate, which is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. Corticosteroids are medicines used for reducing inflammation. Inflammation of the skin happens due to irritation of the skin, and is caused by the release of various substances that are important in the immune system. These substances cause blood vessels to widen, resulting in the irritated area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful, such as is seen in dermatitis or eczema. When clobetasol is applied to the skin it works by acting inside the skin cells to decrease the release of these inflammatory substances. This reduces swelling, redness and itching. There is a range of potencies of corticosteroids applied to the skin. Clobetasol propionate is classed as a very potent corticosteroid. It is prescribed to treat severe inflammatory skin disorders such as eczema and psoriasis that have not responded to weaker corticosteroids. Dermovate scalp application is thinner and easier to apply to the scalp than Dermovate ointment and cream. It is used to treat severe inflammatory disorders of the scalp. How do I use Dermovate scalp application? The liquid should be applied sparingly to the areas of the scalp that need treating using the nozzle of the bottle. You can rub the liquid into your scalp if you wish, but then leave it to dry. The clobetasol will be left on the scalp - it should not be washed off. If you need to wash your hair you should wash and dry your hair before applying the scalp application. Take care to avoid the scalp application running onto the face or into the eyes. Rinse with cold water if accidental contact occurs. Avoid applying it to broken skin. Wash your hands after applying the scalp application to avoid accidentally transferring it to other areas. The scalp application is usually applied once or twice a day. As soon as the condition starts to improve, you should use it less frequently, as directed by your doctor. If there is no improvement in your scalp after two to four weeks of treatment you should consult your doctor. Repeat courses maybe necessary to control flare-ups of psoriasis or eczema, but should only be started on the advice of your doctor. Dermovate scalp application should be used with caution in Children. Psoriasis. If you have been prescribed this medicine to treat psoriasis you should have regular check-ups with your doctor. This is because although corticosteroids may be useful for psoriasis in the short-term, they can sometimes make psoriasis worse, and may cause the condition to relapse into generalised pustular psoriasis after the treatment is stopped. Dermovate scalp application should not be used in Children under one year of age. Skin infected with viruses (eg chickenpox, shingles), fungi (eg ringworm) or bacteria (eg impetigo). This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding unless considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. Possible side effects of Dermovate scalp application Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Skin irritation at site of application, such as burning, stinging, itching and redness. Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Thinning of the skin. Prolonged use of this medicine on extensive areas of skin, broken or raw skin, or underneath airtight dressings may on rare occasions result in enough corticosteroid being absorbed to have side effects on other parts of the body, for example a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. If you think you have experienced a side effect from a medicine or vaccine you should check the patient information leaflet. This lists the known side effects and what to do if you get them. You can also get advice from your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. If they think it's necessary they'll report it for you. How can Dermovate scalp application affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. However, as with all medicines, it is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. If you are using other medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. References: https://www.old.health.gov.il/units/pharmacy/trufot/alonim/Rishum_8_80995518.pdf https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8403/dermovate-scalp-application-clobetasol/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/941/smpc https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2197894.PA1077_005_003.49b8e31d-eccc-41c6-9a35-8742a8113e99.000001Dermovate%20Scalp%20PIL.171023.pdf https://www.drugs.com/cons/dermovate-scalp-application.html https://www.medbroadcast.com/drug/getdrug/dermovate &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis Print This Page Health Reference Psoriasis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin