Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Ciloxan Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Ciloxan Eye Drops/Ointment You are here: Home Ciloxan Eye Drops/Ointment This medication is used to treat eye infections. Ciprofloxacin belongs to a class of drugs called quinolone antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria. This medication treats only bacterial eye infections. It will not work for other types of eye infections. Unnecessary use or overuse of any antibiotic can lead to its decreased effectiveness. What are Ciloxan eye drops used for? Bacterial infections of the eye, eg conjunctivitis. Bacterial infections of the eyelids (blepharitis). Ulcers on the front part of the eye (corneal ulcers). How do Ciloxan eye drops work? Ciloxan eye drops contain the active ingredient ciprofloxacin, which is a type of medicine called a quinolone antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Ciprofloxacin is effective against various types of bacteria, some of which tend to be resistant to other commonly used antibiotics. Ciprofloxacin kills bacteria by stopping a bacterial enzyme called DNA-gyrase from working. This enzyme is involved in replicating and repairing the genetic material (DNA) of the bacteria. If it doesn't work, the bacteria can't repair themselves or reproduce. This kills the bacteria and clears up the infection. Ciprofloxacin eye drops are administered into the eye to treat various types of bacterial eye infections. Administering them directly into the eye allows the ciprofloxacin to act locally on the bacteria that are causing the infection. How do I use Ciloxan eye drops? Infections of the eyes or eyelids: The drops only need to be applied during the day. One or two drops should be put in the affected eye(s) four times a day. In severe infections, your doctor may ask you to use one or two drops every two hours during waking hours for the first two days and then reduce application to four times a day for the rest of the course. Always follow your doctor's instructions. Corneal ulcers: The drops should be applied throughout the day and night as follows: On the first day, put two drops into the affected eye(s) every 15 minutes for the first six hours and then two drops into the affected eye(s) every 30 minutes for the remainder of the day. On the second day, put two drops in the affected eye every hour. On the third to the fourteenth day, put two drops in the affected eye(s) every four hours. If you forget a dose of Ciloxan drops, apply the missed dose as soon as you remember, unless it's almost time for your next dose. In this case, leave out the missed dose and continue with the prescribed routine as usual. Don't use double the amount of eye drops to make up for a missed dose. Make sure you complete the course of treatment that your doctor has prescribed, even if your eye appears to be better. Stopping treatment early increases the chance that your symptoms will come back and that any bacteria will grow resistant to the antibiotic. Get medical advice immediately if your symptoms get worse at any point during treatment, or if you think you have developed a new infection. Do not use Ciloxan for longer than prescribed by your doctor. The drops should not normally be used for longer than 21 days. What should I know before using Ciloxan eye drops? Don't wear contact lenses while you are using Ciloxan eye drops. This is because the drops contain a preservative that can be absorbed by contact lenses and cause eye irritation. Also when you have an eye infection wearing contacts can make it worse. Your vision may blur temporarily after you have put the drops into your eye. Don't drive or operate machinery until this has worn off. If you get a skin rash or any other sign of allergic reaction, for example swelling of the face or throat, tingling, itching, shortness of breath or collapse, you should stop using the eye drops and consult your doctor immediately. Ciloxan eye drops are sterile until opened and keep for four weeks after you first open them. You should dispose of any drops that are left after you've finished your course of treatment. Don't keep any leftover drops 'just in case'. If kept for more than four weeks after opening they could become contaminated with germs that could cause further eye infections. Who shouldn't use Ciloxan eye drops? People who are allergic to any ingredients of the drops or to other quinolone-type antibiotics. Can I use Ciloxan eye drops while pregnant or breastfeeding? The safety of these eye drops for use during pregnancy has not been established. As with all medicines they should not be used during pregnancy unless considered essential by your doctor, and only if the potential benefits outweigh any possible risk to the developing baby. Ask your doctor for more information. It's not known if ciprofloxacin passes into breast milk after being used in the eye. When taken by mouth ciprofloxacin does pass into breast milk. Ciloxan eye drops should therefore be used with caution during breastfeeding and only if the potential benefits outweigh any possible risk to the nursing infant. Seek further medical advice from your doctor. If your doctor does prescribe you Ciloxan eye drops while you are pregnant or breastfeeding you can minimise the amount of medicine that is absorbed into your bloodstream by pressing on your tear duct (the corner of the eye closest to the nose) while putting in the drops, and for a few minutes after. What are the possible side effects of Ciloxan eye drops? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with Ciloxan eye drops. Just because a side effect is stated here doesn't mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common&nbsp; Eye discomfort (eg stinging, burning or gritty feeling in the eye, irritation). Eye redness. White deposits of the medicine on the surface of the eye. This is normal and treatment can be continued. Unusual taste in the mouth. Uncommon Eye pain, itching, swelling. Watery or dry eye(s). Blurred vision. Increased sensitivity of the eye(s) to light. Formation of crust on the margin of eyelid. Swelling of the eyelid. Damage to the eye surface (cornea). Headache. Feeling sick. Rare&nbsp; Inflammation of the surface of the eye (keratitis). Eye numbness. Double vision. Dizziness. Allergic reaction. Ear pain. Nasal inflammation, causing a blocked or runny nose. Skin inflammation (dermatitis). Diarrhoea. Abdominal pain. If you want any more information about the possible side effects of Ciloxan eye drops you should talk to your doctor or pharmacist, or read the leaflet that comes with the medicine. Can I use Ciloxan eye drops with other medicines? If you need to use more than one type of eye drop you should administer them at least five minutes apart, to avoid the second drop washing away the first. Use eye gels or ointments last. Ciprofloxacin eye drops are unlikely to be absorbed into the bloodstream in sufficient quantities to affect any medicines that you're taking by mouth. However, you should always tell your doctor or pharmacist if you're using any other medicines, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment, so they can check that the combination is safe. References: https://www.mydr.com.au/medicines/cmis/ciloxan-eye-drops https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eye-care/a6407/ciloxan-eye-drops-ciprofloxacin/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/836/smpc https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2141365.PA0290_069_003.254fa42d-1ded-442d-a318-29704831335c.000001Ciloxan%20Clean%20PIL.140128.pdf https://www.nps.org.au/medical-info/medicine-finder/ciloxan-ear-drops https://chealth.canoe.com/drug/getdrug/ciloxan https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-8423-6093/ciloxan-ophthalmic-eye/ciprofloxacin-drops-ophthalmic/details &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Conjunctivitis , Blepharitis Print This Page Health Reference Conjunctivitis Blepharitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin