MRSA infections | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query MRSA infections You are here: Home MRSA infections Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection is caused by a strain of staph bacteria that&#039;s become resistant to the antibiotics commonly used to treat ordinary staph infections. What is it? Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection is caused by a strain of staph bacteria that's become resistant to the antibiotics commonly used to treat ordinary staph infections. Most MRSA infections occur in people who have been in hospitals or other health care settings, such as nursing homes and dialysis centers. When it occurs in these settings, it's known as health care-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA). HA-MRSA infections typically are associated with invasive procedures or devices, such as surgeries, intravenous tubing or artificial joints. Another type of MRSA infection has occurred in the wider community — among healthy people. This form, community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA), often begins as a painful skin boil. It's spread by skin-to-skin contact. At-risk populations include groups such as high school wrestlers, child care workers and people who live in crowded conditions. Symptoms Staph skin infections, including MRSA, generally start as small red bumps that resemble pimples, boils or spider bites. These can quickly turn into deep, painful abscesses that require surgical draining. Sometimes the bacteria remain confined to the skin. But they can also burrow deep into the body, causing potentially life-threatening infections in bones, joints, surgical wounds, the bloodstream, heart valves and lungs. Causes There are different varieties of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, commonly called "staph." Staph bacteria are normally found on the skin or in the nose of about one-third of the population. The bacteria are generally harmless unless they enter the body through a cut or other wound, and even then they usually cause only minor skin problems in healthy people. Antibiotic resistance MRSA is the result of decades of often unnecessary antibiotic use. For years, antibiotics have been prescribed for colds, flu and other viral infections that don't respond to these drugs. Even when antibiotics are used appropriately, they contribute to the rise of drug-resistant bacteria because they don't destroy every germ they target. Bacteria live on an evolutionary fast track, so germs that survive treatment with one antibiotic soon learn to resist others.&nbsp; Risk factors Because hospital and community strains of MRSA generally occur in different settings, the risk factors for the two strains differ. Risk factors for HA-MRSA Being hospitalized . MRSA remains a concern in hospitals, where it can attack those most vulnerable — older adults and people with weakened immune systems. Having an invasive medical device . Medical tubing — such as intravenous lines or urinary catheters — can provide a pathway for MRSA to travel into your body. Residing in a long term care facility . MRSA is prevalent in nursing homes. Carriers of MRSA have the ability to spread it, even if they're not sick themselves. Risk factors for CA-MRSA Participating in contact sports . MRSA can spread easily through cuts and abrasions and skin-to-skin contact. Living in crowded or unsanitary conditions . Outbreaks of MRSA have occurred in military training camps, child care centers and jails. Men having sex with men . Homosexual men have a higher risk of developing MRSA infections. Complications MRSA infections can resist the effects of many common antibiotics, so they are more difficult to treat. This can allow the infections to spread and sometimes become life-threatening. MRSA infections may affect your: Bloodstream Lungs Heart Bones Joints Diagnosis Doctors diagnose MRSA by checking a tissue sample or nasal secretions for signs of drug-resistant bacteria. The sample is sent to a lab where it's placed in a dish of nutrients that encourage bacterial growth. But because it takes about 48 hours for the bacteria to grow, newer tests that can detect staph DNA in a matter of hours are now becoming more widely available. References http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/understanding-mrsa http://www.irishhealth.com/article.html?con=592 http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/MRSA/Pages/Symptoms.aspx https://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/ http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mrsa/basics/definition/con-20024479 Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Bactroban Nasal Ointment (Mupirocin) Cefodox (Cefpodoxime) Tablets Tetralysal (Lymecycline) Capsules Suprax (Cefixime) Tablets Normix (Rifaximin) Tablets Minocin (Minocycline) Capsules/Tablets Medicine Reference Rifadin Capsules Trimethoprim Tablets/Suspension Bactroban Nasal Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin