Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Ativan - (Lorazepam) You are here: Home Ativan - (Lorazepam) Ativan (Lorazepam) is a medicine which is used to treat anxiety, excitement, mania and status epilepticus. Ativan is also used as a pre-operative medication. Why have I been prescribed Ativan? Ativan (Lorazepam) is a medicine which is used to treat anxiety , excitement, mania and status epilepticus . Ativan is also used as a pre-operative medication. How does it work? Ativan belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines. These work by increasing the amount of a certain chemical in the brain which calms the brain down and stops the nerves firing inappropriately. When and how do I take it? Ativan should be taken as directed by your doctor, depending on what you are taking it for. What’s the dose? Adults: Moderate and severe anxiety : 1-4mg daily in divided doses. Insomnia : 1-2mg before retiring Premedication before operative dentistry or general surgery: 2-3mg the night before operation.&nbsp;2-4mg one to two hours before operation. Elderly and debilitated patients: Elderly and debilitated patients may respond to lower doses and half the normal adult dose or less may be sufficient. This initial dose should be adjusted as needed and tolerated. Children (aged 5-13 years): Premedication: 0.5 - 2.5mg at 0.05mg/kg to the nearest 0.5mg according to weight, not less than one hour before operation. Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or pharmacist. You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Ativan: scopolamine aminophylline clozapine haloperidol probenecid sodium valproate theophylline The following types of medicine may interact with Ativan: anaesthetics anticonvulsants antidepressants antipsychotics anxiolytics barbiturates benzodiazepines cytochrome P450 enzyme inhibitors hypnotics medicines that affect seizure control medicines which depress the CNS narcotic analgesics sedative antihistamines sedatives If you are taking Ativan and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Common side effects are: muscle weakness asthenia sedation fatigue drowsiness Ataxia confusion depression unmasking of depression dizziness Respiratory depression Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Do not drink alcohol with this medicine. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/lorazepam-a-benzodiazepine https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorazepam http://www.rxlist.com/ativan-drug.htm http://www.drugs.com/ativan.html http://www.webmd.com/drugs/drug-6685-Ativan+Oral.aspx?drugid=6685&amp;drugname=Ativan+Oral http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682053.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Anxiety , Social anxiety disorder , Epilepsy Print This Page More Videos... Generalised Anxiety Disorder Health Reference Anxiety Social anxiety disorder Epilepsy Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin