Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Ebixa (Memantine)... Edronax Efexor Capsules -... Efexor XL Capsules Eklira Genuair inh... Elantan LA Eldepryl Eligard Subcutaneo... Eliquis (apixaban)... EllaOne Tablet Elocon Cream/Ointm... Elocon Scalp Lotio... Eltroxin Tablets Elvina Elvinette Emadine Drops Emcor Tablets Emergency Contrace... EMLA Cream 5% Enap Tablets Enbrel Injection Enstilar Foam Entocort CR capsul... Epanutin Capsules Epiduo gel Epilim Epilim Chrono EpiPen Equasym Erdotin Erythromycin Table... Erythroped (Erythr... Esbriet (Pirfenido... Escitalopram Table... Esomeprazole Ethosuximide Etoflam Gel Etrivex Shampoo Eucardic (Carvedil... Eumovate Cream/Oin... Evening Primrose O... Evista Tablets Evorel conti patch... Evra contraceptive... Exelon (Rivastigmi... Exemestane Tablets Exforge Tablets -... Exjade Dispersible... Exocin Eye Drops Ezetrol Medicine - E Ebixa (Memantine) Tablets Ebixa is a drug prescribed to treat moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. Edronax The active substance in Edronax is reboxetine which is part of a group of medicines called antidepressants. Edronax is used in acute treatment of depressive illness / major depression as well as for maintaining the improvement of your symptoms when you have initially responded to Edronax. Efexor Capsules - Venlafaxine Efexor (Venlafaxine) is a treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Efexor XL Capsules Efexor XL (Venlafaxine) is a treatment for adults with depression. Treating depression properly is important to help you get better. If it is not treated, your condition may not go away and may become more serious and more difficult to treat. Eklira Genuair inhaler Eklira Genuair inhaler contains the active ingredient aclidinium bromide, which is a type of medicine known as an antimuscarinic or anticholinergic bronchodilator. It works by opening the airways to make it easier to breathe. Elantan LA This medicine is used to prevent angina pectoris. Eldepryl Eldepryl (Selegeline) is used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Eldepryl may be taken alone in the early stages of your condition, delaying the need for the addition of other medicines. Eligard Subcutaneous Syringe Eligard is indicated for the treatment of hormone dependent advanced prostate cancer and for the treatment of high risk localised and locally advanced hormone dependent prostate cancer in combination with radiotherapy. It is available in six-monthly (45mg), three-monthly (22.5mg) and one- monthly (7.5mg) formulations. Eliquis (apixaban) Tablets Eliquis tablets contain the active ingredient apixaban, which is a type of medicine called an anti-thrombotic. It is used to stop blood clots forming within the blood vessels. EllaOne Tablet EllaOne is known as a 'morning after pill'. It is used to reduce the chances of becoming pregnant after unprotected sex or failure of a contraceptive method. Elocon Cream/Ointment Elocon cream and ointment both contain the active ingredient mometasone, which is a steroid medicine used to reduce inflammation. Elocon Scalp Lotion Elocon Scalp Lotion is one of a group of medicines called topical corticosteroids. It is classified as a “potent corticosteroid”. These medicines are put on the surface of the skin to reduce the redness and itchiness caused by certain skin problems. In adults and children, Elocon Scalp Lotion is used to reduce redness and itchiness caused by certain conditions affecting the scalp, called psoriasis or dermatitis. Psoriasis is a skin disease in which itchy, scaly, pink patches develop on the elbows, knees, scalp and other parts of the body. Dermatitis is a condition brought on by the skin reacting to outside agents e.g. detergents, causing the skin to become red and itchy. Eltroxin Tablets Eltroxin (Levothyroxine) is used to treat an under active thyroid which is not producing enough thyroxine. Elvina Elvina (drospirenone and ethinyl estradiol) prevents ovulation (the release of an egg from an ovary) and also cause changes in your cervical and uterine lining, making it harder for sperm to reach the uterus and harder for a fertilized egg to attach to the uterus. Elvinette Elvinette is a contraceptive pill and is used to prevent pregnancy. Each tablet contains a small amount of two different female hormones, namely drospirenone and ethinylestradiol. Emadine Drops Emadine eye drops contain the active ingredient emedastine, which is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It works by preventing the actions of histamine. Emcor Tablets Emcor (Bisoprolol) is used in the management of hypertension and the management of angina pectoris. Emergency Contraception Emergency contraception is also known as post coital contraception and can prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse. It is not quite true to say 'the morning after the night before' as it can actually work up to 72 hours of unprotected sex. EMLA Cream 5% This medication contains 2 amide-type local anesthetics, lidocaine and prilocaine. It is used on normal, unbroken skin or on the outer genital area to prevent pain before certain procedures such as inserting a needle, skin grafts, or skin laser surgery. It works by temporarily numbing the skin and surrounding area. Do not use this product in the ears. Enap Tablets Your doctor has probably prescribed Enap (Enalapril) for you for one of the following reasons which will have been explained to you: Your blood pressure is too high You have a heart condition sometimes referred to as 'heart failure'. You have a damaged heart muscle Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin