Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Kalcipos-D Forte Kapake Tablets Keflex (Cefalexin)... Kemadrin - (Procyc... Kenacomb Ointment Keppra Tablets/Liq... Keral Tablets/Sach... Ketofall eye drops... Kidmel (Melatonin)... Kidnap (Melatonin)... Klacid LA Tablets Klacid Suspension Klacid Tablets - K... Klariger Tablets-... Klean-Prep Kliogest Komboglyze (saxagl... Konverge Tablets Medicine - K Kalcipos-D Forte Kalcipos-D forte is used to prevent and treat calcium and vitamin D3 deficiency in the elderly, and as an additional treatment in the management of osteoporosis, when a risk of deficiency of calcium and vitamin D3 is suspected. Kapake Tablets Kapake 30mg/500mg Tablets are one of a group of medicines called analgesics or painkillers. They are used to relieve severe pain in adults. Kapake 30mg/500mg Tablets contain codeine, an opioid analgesic, in combination with paracetamol. Keflex (Cefalexin) Tablets/Suspension Keflex is a broad-spectrum antibiotic, which means it is active against a wide variety of bacteria. It treats infections by killing or stopping the growth of the bacteria that cause them. Kemadrin - (Procyclidine) Kemadrin (Procyclidine) is used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease such as stiff muscles, paralysis, tremor, difficulties with speech, writing and walking, dribbling, sweating, uncontrolled eye movements and depression. Also used to treat symptoms when Parkinson's isnt present. Kenacomb Ointment Kenacomb ointment is used to relieve the inflammation and itching of skin conditions which are likely to become infected or are already infected. Keppra Tablets/Liquid Keppra 250 mg film-coated tablets is an antiepileptic medicine (a medicine used to treat seizures in epilepsy). Keppra Liquid contains 100mg of Levetiracetam in each ml of liquid. Keral Tablets/Sachets Keral tablets contain the active ingredient dexketoprofen, which is a type of medicine called a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). NSAIDs are used to relieve pain and inflammation. Ketofall eye drops (ketotifen) Ketofall eye drops contain the active ingredient ketotifen, which is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. Kidmel (Melatonin) Liquid Melatonin is the natural hormone your body secretes that helps to maintain your wake-sleep cycle (also called “biological clock”). The wake-sleep cycle is the process of sleep and wakefulness; in humans this averages 8 hours of nighttime sleep and 16 hours of daytime activity.&nbsp; Kidnap (Melatonin) Liquid Melatonin is the natural hormone your body secretes that helps to maintain your wake-sleep cycle (also called “biological clock”). The wake-sleep cycle is the process of sleep and wakefulness; in humans this averages 8 hours of nighttime sleep and 16 hours of daytime activity.&nbsp; Klacid LA Tablets Klacid and Klacid LA are the brand names for the active ingredient clarithromycin, which is used for the treatment of mild to moderately severe infections caused by pathogens susceptible to clarithromycin. Klacid Suspension This antibiotic is used to treat various bacterial infections. Klacid Tablets - Klacid Forte Tablets - Klacid suspension Klacid and Klacid LA are the brand names for the active ingredient clarithromycin, which is used for the treatment of mild to moderately severe infections caused by pathogens susceptible to clarithromycin. Klariger Tablets- (Clarithromycin) Klariger are the brand names for the active ingredient clarithromycin, which is used for the treatment of mild to moderately severe infections caused by pathogens susceptible to clarithromycin. Klean-Prep Klean-Prep sachets contain the active ingredient macrogol, which is a type of medicine known as an osmotic laxative. Klean-Prep also contains sodium sulphate, sodium bicarbonate, sodium chloride and potassium chloride. Kliogest Kliogest tablets are a hormone replacement therapy (HRT) preparation. They are available in two strengths, Kliogest 1mg tablets and Climagest 2mg tablets. Whichever strength you have been prescribed, each pack will contain two types of tablets. One type of tablet contains estradiol and the other type contains estradio in combination with norethisterone. Estradiol and norethisterone are forms of the main female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Estradiol is a naturally occuring form of oestrogen and norethisterone is a synthetic form of progesterone. Komboglyze (saxagliptin, metformin) Komboglyze tablets contain two active ingredients, metformin and saxagliptin. These are both medicines used to help control blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes. Konverge Tablets Konverge contains two substances called olmesartan medoxomil and amlodipine (as amlodipine besilate). Both of these substances help to control high blood pressure. Olmesartan medoxomil belongs to a group of medicines called “angiotensin-II receptor antagonists” which lower blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels. Amlodipine belongs to a group of substances called “calcium channel blockers”. Amlodipine stops calcium from moving into the blood vessel wall which stops the blood vessels from tightening thereby also reducing blood pressure. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin