Betnovate Cream/Ointment, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betnovate Cream/Ointment You are here: Home Betnovate Cream/Ointment Betnovate (Bethametasone) cream/ointment is used in the topical management of skin conditions such as: eczema and psoriasis. Why have I been prescribed Betnovate? Betnovate (Bethametasone) cream/ointment is used in the topical management of skin conditions such as: eczema and psoriasis . How does it work? Betnovate cream is one of a group of medicines called topical steroids. "Topical" means they are put on the skin. Topical steroids reduce the redness and itchiness of certain skin problems. They should not be confused with "anabolic" steroids misused by some body builders and athletes and taken as tablets or injection. When and how do I use it? It should be used sparingly. The amount of cream you can fit on the tip of your finger should be enough to treat an area the size of the back of your hand. For an adult: You should find that Two fingertips of cream will treat both hands or one foot Three fingertips of cream will treat one arm Six fingertips of cream will treat one leg Fourteen fingertips of cream will treat the front and back on one trunk Do not worry if you find that you need a little more or a little less than this – it is only a rough guide For a child: It should not be used in children under one year of age. The smaller the child the less you use. A child of 4 years needs about a third of the adult amount. What’s the dose? Usually used two or three times a day. Could it interact with other tablets? There are no known interactions between Betnovate and other medications. Herbal products should only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Betnovate cream can have side effects. Most people find using this cream causes no problems when used in the right amount for the correct length of time. IF you find your condition gets worse during treatment you may be allergic to the cream or have a skin infection which needs other treatment. The excipient Chlorocresol may cause allergic reactions. Using more than the correct amount may: thin the skin so that it damages easily allow the active ingredients to pass through the skin and affect other parts of the body, especially in infants and children. Repeated courses of topical steroids over a long time may sometimes cause changes in hair growth and skin colour, itching, a burning sensation or reddening of the skin where the cream was applied. Rarely, when used on psoriasis (or on stopping treatment) it may make the condition worse e.g. a pustular form of the disease may occur. That is why, if used in this condition, your doctor will want to see you regularly. If you feel unwell or have any unusual discomfort you do not understand, tell your doctor as soon as possible. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Hydrocortisyl. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You should only take this medicine during pregnancy if your doctor thinks you need to take it. You should only breast-feed your baby while taking this medicine on the advice of your doctor or midwife. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://irishskinfoundation.ie/news/detail/drug-availability-bulletin-betnovate-and-eumovate-creams-and-ointments http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2126867.PA1077_002_001.353e07f7-678a-44e1-bdbb-72ccce5ac51f.000001Betnovate%20C%20PIL.141217.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6308/betnovate-cream-ointment-lotion-betamethasone/ http://www.drugs.com/cons/betnovate.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/707 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis , Eczema Print This Page More Videos... Eczema Eczema - (Contact Eczema) Health Reference Psoriasis Eczema Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin