Acerycal Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query AceryCal 5/5: 10/10 Tablets You are here: Home AceryCal 5/5: 10/10 Tablets Substitution therapy for the treatment of essential hypertension and/or stable coronary artery disease in patients already controlled with perindopril and amlodipine given concurrently at the same dose level. What is Acerycal used for? Substitution therapy for the treatment of essential hypertension and/or stable coronary artery disease in patients already controlled with perindopril and amlodipine given concurrently at the same dose level. How to take Acerycal? One tablet per day as a single dose, preferably to be taken in the morning and before a meal. The fixed dose combination is not suitable for initial therapy. If a change of dosing is required, AceryCal could be modified or individual titration with free combination may be considered. Patients with Renal Impairment and Elderly: Elimination of perindoprilat is decreased in the elderly and in patients with renal failure. Therefore, the usual medical follow-up will include frequent monitoring of creatinine and potassium. AceryCal can be administered in patients with CrCl ≥60 mL/min and is not suitable for patients with CrCl &lt;60 mL/min. In these patients, an individual dose titration with the monocomponents is recommended. Changes in amlodipine plasma concentrations are not correlated with degree of renal impairment.&nbsp; Patients with Hepatic Impairment: A dosage regimen for patients with hepatic impairment has not been established. Therefore, AceryCal should be administered with caution.&nbsp; Children and Adolescents: Acerycal should not be used in children and adolescents as the efficacy and tolerability of perindopril and amlodipine, alone or in combination, have not been established in children and adolescents. Administration Should be taken on an empty stomach. Preferably taken in the morning &amp; before a meal. Contraindications Hypersensitivity to perindopril, amlodipine, other dihydropyridines and ACE inhibitors or to any of the excipients of AceryCal. Due to the presence of lactose, patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, glucose-galactose malabsorption, or the Lapp-lactase deficiency should not take AceryCal. Perindopril: History of angioedema associated with previous ACE inhibitor therapy; hereditary or idiopathic angioedema. Amlodipine: Severe hypotension; shock including cardiogenic shock; obstruction of the outflow-tract of the left ventricle (eg, high-grade aortic stenosis); unstable angina pectoris (excluding Prinzmetal's angina); heart failure after acute myocardial infarction (during the first 28 days). All contraindications related to each monocomponent should also apply to the fixed combination of AceryCal. Use in pregnancy: AceryCal should not be initiated during pregnancy. Unless continued AceryCal is considered essential, patients planning pregnancy should be changed to alternative antihypertensive treatments which have an established safety profile for use in pregnancy. When pregnancy is diagnosed, treatment with AceryCal should be stopped immediately, and if appropriate, alternative therapy should be started. Perindopril: The use of AceryCal is not recommended during the 1st trimester of pregnancy. The use of AceryCal is contraindicated during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy. Epidemiological evidence regarding the risk of teratogenicity following exposure to ACE inhibitors during the 1st trimester of pregnancy has not been conclusive; however, a small increase in risk cannot be excluded. Unless continued ACE inhibitor therapy is considered essential, patients planning pregnancy should be changed to alternative antihypertensive treatments which have an established safety profile for use in pregnancy. When pregnancy is diagnosed, treatment with ACE inhibitors should be stopped immediately, and if appropriate, alternative therapy should be started. ACE inhibitors therapy exposure during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters is known to induce human foetotoxicity (decreased renal function, oligohydramnios, skull ossification retardation) and neonatal toxicity (renal failure, hypotension, hyperkalaemia). Should exposure to ACE inhibitors have occurred from the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, ultrasound check of renal function and skull is recommended. Infants whose mothers have taken ACE inhibitors should be closely observed for hypotension. Amlodipine: Data on a limited number of exposed pregnancies indicate no adverse effects of amlodipine and other calcium-receptor antagonists on the health of the foetus. However, there may be a risk of prolonged delivery. Animal studies have not shown teratogenic effect. Consequently, AceryCal is not recommended during the 1st trimester of pregnancy. When a pregnancy is planned or confirmed, the switch to an alternative treatment should be initiated as soon as possible. AceryCal is contraindicated during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy. Should exposure to AceryCal have occurred from the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, ultrasound check of renal function and skull is recommended. Infants exposed in utero to ACE inhibitors should be closely observed for hypotension, oliguria and hyperkalemia.&nbsp; Warnings All warnings related to each monocomponent, listed as follows, should apply also to the fixed combination of AceryCal. Perindopril: Hypersensitivity/Angioedema: Angioedema of the face, extremities, lips, mucous membranes, tongue, glottis and/or larynx has been reported rarely in patients treated with ACE inhibitors, including perindopril . This may occur at any time during therapy. In such cases, AceryCal should promptly be discontinued and appropriate monitoring should be initiated and continued until complete resolution of symptoms has occurred. In those instances where swelling was confined to the face and lips, the condition generally resolved without treatment although antihistamines have been useful in relieving symptoms. Angioedema associated with laryngeal oedema may be fatal. Where there is involvement of the tongue, glottis or larynx, likely to cause airway obstruction, emergency therapy should be administered promptly. This may include the administration of adrenaline and/or the maintenance of a patent airway. The patient should be under close medical supervision until complete and sustained resolution of symptoms has occurred. Patients with a history of angioedema unrelated to ACE inhibitor therapy may be at increased risk of angioedema while receiving an ACE inhibitor (see Contraindications). Intestinal angioedema has been reported rarely in patients treated with ACE inhibitors. These patients presented with abdominal pain (with or without nausea or vomiting); in some cases there was no prior facial angioedema and C-1 esterase levels were normal. The angioedema was diagnosed by procedures including abdominal CT scan, or ultrasound or at surgery and symptoms resolved after stopping the ACE inhibitor. Intestinal angioedema should be included in the differential diagnosis of patients on ACE inhibitors presenting with abdominal pain. Anaphylactoid Reactions During Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Apheresis: Rarely, patients receiving ACE inhibitors during LDL apheresis with dextran sulfate have experienced life-threatening anaphylactoid reactions. These reactions were avoided by temporarily withholding ACE inhibitor therapy prior to each apheresis. Anaphylactoid Reactions During Desensitisation: Patients receiving ACE inhibitors during desensitisation treatment (eg, hymenoptera venom) have experienced anaphylactoid reactions. In the same patients, these reactions have been avoided when the ACE inhibitors were temporarily withheld, but they reappeared upon inadvertent rechallenge. N eutropenia/Agranulocytosis/Thrombocytopenia/Anaemia: Neutropenia/agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia and anaemia have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors. In patients with normal renal function and no other complicating factors, neutropenia occurs rarely. Perindopril should be used with extreme caution in patients with collagen vascular disease, immunosuppressant therapy, treatment with allopurinol or procainamide or a combination of these complicating factors, especially if there is preexisting impaired renal function. Some of these patients developed serious infections, which in a few instances did not respond to intensive antibiotic therapy. If perindopril is used in such patients, periodic monitoring of white blood cell counts is advised and patients should be instructed to report any sign of infection. How to store Acerycal Store below 30°C. Protect from moisture. Shelf-Life: 2 years. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.mims.com/hongkong/drug/info/AceryCal/?type=full http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/13742/SPC/ACERYCAL+5+10/ http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/13726/PIL/ACERYCAL/ http://www.imb.ie/images/uploaded/documents/DoctorLetter_PROOF-5%2011%2009%2009%20FINAL.pdf http://www.imb.ie/EN/Publications/Publications/Acerycal-perindopril-amlodipine--Important-Safety-Information-from-Les-Laboratoires-Servier-.aspx http://www.imb.ie/images/uploaded/documents/DoctorLetter_PROOF-5%2011%2009%2009%20FINAL.pdf http://www.drugs.com/uk/acerycal-10mg-10mg-tablet-leaflet.html &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin