accolate tablets lynchs pharmacy douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Accolate - (Zafirlukast) You are here: Home Accolate - (Zafirlukast) Accolate contains a medicine called zafirlukast. This belongs to a group of medicines called leukotriene antagonists. Accolate is used to control the symptoms of your asthma, and prevent your asthma from getting worse. Why have I been prescribed Accolate? Accolate contains a medicine called zafirlukast. This belongs to a group of medicines called leukotriene antagonists. Accolate is used to control the symptoms of your asthma. It is also used to prevent your asthma from getting worse. How does it work? Accolate blocks certain chemicals (leukotrienes) which cause narrowing and inflammation of the airways and also cause allergy symptoms . When and how do I take it? Usually one tablet at the start of the morning and one tablet last thing at night. Your doctor may decide to increase your dose, depending on your condition. Try to take your medicine at the same times each day. Swallow each tablet whole with a drink of water. Do not take your tablets with a meal. What’s the dose? The usual dose is one 20mg tablet taken twice a day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, or have recently taken, any other medicines. This includes medicines that you buy without a prescription and herbal medicines. This is because Accolate can affect the way some medicines work and some medicines can have an effect on Accolate. In particular, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of thr following medicines: Theophylline (used to treat asthma ) Erythromycin ( an antibiotic) Terfenadine (used to treat hayfever ) Warfarin (used to thin the blood) Aspirin. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Common side effects include: &nbsp;Feeling of discomfort or generally feeling unwell. &nbsp;Stomach and gut problems, such as feeling or being sick, diarrhoea or stomach pain. These effects are usually mild. &nbsp; Headache. This is usually mild. &nbsp;Infections. &nbsp;Difficulty sleeping. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Accolate. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Accolate should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed. Accolate should not be administered to mothers who are breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. &nbsp; References: 1. Medicines.ie Website - Accolate SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/6796/SPC/Accolate+Tablets/ 2. Medicines.ie Website- Accolate PIL&nbsp; 3.http://www.rxlist.com/accolate-drug.htm Read More &gt; Health Reference : Asthma Print This Page Health Reference Asthma Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin