Moles | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Moles You are here: Home Moles Moles, known medically as nevi, are clusters of pigmented cells that often appear as small, dark brown spots. However, moles can come in a range of colors and can develop virtually anywhere on your body. What is it? Moles, known medically as nevi, are clusters of pigmented cells that often appear as small, dark brown spots. However, moles can come in a range of colours and can develop virtually anywhere on your body. Most moles are harmless, but in rare cases, moles may become cancerous. Monitoring moles and other pigmented patches is an important step in detecting skin cancer , especially malignant melanoma . Not all melanomas develop from pre-existing moles, but many begin in or near a mole or other dark spot on the skin. Symptoms Although the typical mole is a brown spot, moles come in a wide variety of colors, shapes and sizes: Colour . They're usually flesh-colored, reddish-brown or medium to dark brown. Shape . They can vary in shape from oval to round. Size . They can be as small as a pinhead or large enough to cover an entire limb. Generally, moles are less than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) long — or smaller than the diameter of a pencil eraser. Moles can develop virtually anywhere on your body, including your scalp, armpits, under your nails, and between your fingers and toes. Most people have between 10 and 40 moles, although the number you have may change throughout life. New moles can appear into midadulthood, and some moles may disappear as you age. Varied surfaces The surface of a mole can be smooth or wrinkled, flat or raised. Sometimes a mole may start out flat and brown and later become slightly raised and lighter in color. Some may become raised enough that they form a small stalk, which eventually may wear away. Others may simply disappear. Although most moles develop by age 20, they can continue to appear until midlife. There are also certain times in your life when moles are more apt to change; for example, they're likely to become darker, larger and more numerous because of hormonal changes that occur during adolescence or pregnancy. Causes Melanin is a natural pigment that gives your skin its colour. It's produced in cells called melanocytes, either in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) or the outer layers of the skin's second layer (dermis). Melanin is then transported to the surface cells of your skin. Normally, melanin is distributed evenly, but sometimes melanocytes grow together in a cluster, giving rise to moles. Scientists don't know why moles develop or what purpose they serve, if any. Most moles are harmless and don't require special care, but some people have unusual-looking moles, called dysplastic nevi, which are more likely to turn cancerous than ordinary moles are. Complications Several types of moles have a higher than average risk of becoming cancerous. They include: Large moles present at birth. Large moles that are present at birth are called congenital nevi. These moles may increase your risk of malignant melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer. Moles that run in families. Moles that are larger than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) — or larger than the diameter of a pencil eraser — and irregular in shape are known as atypical (dysplastic) nevi. These moles tend to be hereditary. They're frequently described as looking like fried eggs because they usually have dark brown centers and lighter, uneven borders. If you have dysplastic nevi, you have a greater risk of developing malignant melanoma. Numerous moles. If you have many moles — 20 or more — you're at a greater risk of developing melanoma. Diagnosis You may choose to make a skin examination a regular part of your preventive medical care. Talk to your doctor about a schedule that's appropriate for you. Your doctor will examine your skin from head to toe, including your scalp, your palms, the soles of your feet and the skin between your buttocks. If your doctor suspects that a mole may be cancerous, he or she may take a sample of the tissue (biopsy) and submit the biopsy for microscopic examination. References http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/guide/moles-freckles-skin-tags http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/moles/basics/definition/con-20019745 http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/moles/pages/introduction.aspx https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/M/Moles/ Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin