Yeast infection,male | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Yeast infection,male You are here: Home Yeast infection,male It&#039;s possible for a man to contract a genital yeast infection if he has unprotected sexual intercourse with a partner who has a genital yeast infection. What is it? It's possible for a man to contract a genital yeast infection if he has unprotected sexual intercourse with a partner who has a genital yeast infection. However, just because your girlfriend has a yeast infection doesn't mean you will get one too. Sexual transmission of yeast infections is uncommon. Many people are under the impression that only women get genital yeast infections. Regardless of your sex, though, prolonged antibiotic use increases your risk of a yeast infection. Also, men and women with diabetes or impaired immune systems, such as those with HIV, are more susceptible to yeast infections. Signs and symptoms of a male yeast infection include a reddish rash, along with itching or burning at the tip of the penis. Fortunately, most male yeast infections are easily treated with an over-the-counter antifungal treatment, such as Monistat (yes, men can use it too). Apply the medication directly to the affected skin twice daily for a week. If the rash doesn't go away, or if it recurs frequently, consult your doctor. If you and your partner have symptoms of genital yeast infection, it's important that you both be treated. Otherwise, you may keep reinfecting each other. Also, it's generally recommended that you refrain from sexual contact until all signs and symptoms of the infection are gone. Symptoms Around the head of the penis: Red Skin Swelling&nbsp; Irritation and soreness Inflammation Itchiness&nbsp; White patches on the skin Foreskin: Difficulty pulling back the foreskin Thick, lumpy discharge under the foreskin, producing a unpleasant odour Pain: Passing urine During intercourse Causes Genital candidiasis, often referred to as yeast infection, is caused by the fungus&nbsp; Candida. As well as affecting the genitals, yeast infection can be found on other areas of skin or mucous membtrane such as the mouth, where it known as oral thrush. Candida fungi are found naturally inside the body and on the skin at levels that usually don't cause problems. However, under certain conditions the fungus is able to thrive and grow to numbers that result in candidiasis, with the fungal cells producing hyphae (structures that penetrate the tissue). While yeast infection in men is generally sexually acquired, it's not classed as a sexually transmitted disease (STD) because it can be present in men who are not sexually active. Men who have a female partner with yeast infection do not need to seek treatment unless they also get symtoms, since sex does not necessarily result in transmission of the fungal infection to men. Men are recommended to avoid unprotected sex until the woman's infection has cleared upafter treatment. Risk factors Antibiotics - recent broad-spectrum antibiotic use, which causes a change in the balance of the normal microbial flora and allows the&nbsp; Candida to overgrow. Medicaton that suppresses the immune system such as chemotherapy or corticosteroids. Immunosuppresion - such as with HIV infection reduces the body's defence against the fungus. Diabetes - Higher levels of blood sugar allow a more conductive evironment for the yeast to thrive. Uncircumcised men - have a moist, dark, warm, space underneath the foreskin that is favorable for yeast growth. Personal hygeine - Chronic local irritants such as bath foam, soaps and shower gel can irritate the penis leading to fungal infection. not drying carefully after washing is also a risk factor. Receiving renal dialysis. References http://www.mayoclinic.org/male-yeast-infection/expert-answers/faq-20058464 http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/guide/candidiasis-yeast-infection http://www.std-gov.org/stds/yeast_in_man.htm http://www.medicinenet.com/yeast_infection_in_women_and_men/page4.htm http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/246615.php?page=2 Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Diflazole - (Fluconazole) Tablets/Suspension Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin