Desmotabs, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Desmotabs You are here: Home Desmotabs DDAVP tablets and DDAVP Melt tablets both contain the active ingredient desmopressin, which is a type of medicine called a vasopressin analogue. It is similar to a hormone produced naturally by the body, called vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone. What is it used for? Treating a disease called cranial diabetes insipidus, in which large amounts of dilute urine are produced, resulting in constant thirst. Treating increased, intense thirst and production of large volumes of dilute urine following surgical removal or destruction of the pituitary gland (post-hypophysectomy polydipsia and polyuria). How does it work? DDAVP tablets and DDAVP Melt tablets both contain the active ingredient desmopressin, which is a type of medicine called a vasopressin analogue. It is similar to a hormone produced naturally by the body, called vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is produced by the pituitary gland in the brain. It is involved in controlling the natural balance of water levels in the body. It normally acts on receptors in the kidneys to prevent excessive amounts of water being filtered out of the blood and into the urine. This reduces the production of urine. Desmopressin is similar in structure to this hormone and works by mimicking its action. In the condition diabetes insipidus, the kidneys produce excessive quantities of very dilute (but otherwise normal) urine. This causes excessive thirst and can lead to dehydration. Diabetes insipidus can be caused by a problem with the kidneys themselves (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), or by a deficiency in the production of ADH by the pituitary gland (cranial diabetes insipidus). Desmopressin is used to treat this latter rare form of diabetes (which should not be confused with diabetes mellitus, also known as sugar diabetes). If the pituitary gland is surgically removed, this will also result in a deficiency in the production of ADH and similar symptoms of excessive urination and thirst. Desmopressin works by binding to the ADH receptors in the kidneys, which mimics the effect of natural ADH. This reduces the production of urine and as a result improves thirst. DDAVP tablets are standard tablets. DDAVP Melt tablets are designed to be placed under the tongue, where they will dissolve in the saliva without the need for a drink. Use with caution in Decreased kidney function. Disease involving the heart and blood vessels (cardiovascular disease). Cystic fibrosis. High blood pressure (hypertension). Imbalance of water and salt concentrations in the blood (fluid and electrolyte imbalance). People at risk of developing raised pressure inside the skull (intracranial pressure). Not to be used in Heart failure. Other conditions treated with medicines that increase urine production (diuretics). Abnormal intense thirst caused by mental disorders (psychogenic polydipsia). People who drink abnormally large amounts of fluid, including alcohol. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should be used with caution during pregnancy, and only if the expected benefit is greater than any possible risk to the developing baby. Seek medical advice from your doctor. If this medicine is used during pregnancy, blood pressure monitoring is recommended due to an increased risk of pre-eclampsia. This medicine may pass into breast milk. Seek medical advice from your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Headache. Stomach ache. Nausea and vomiting. Emotional disturbance in children (very rarely). If taken without restricting fluid intake: retention of water in the body tissues (fluid retention), low blood sodium level (hyponatraemia) or seizures (convulsions). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the drug's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while using this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. The following medicines may increase the release of natural antidiuretic hormone in the body and may therefore increase the effect of desmopressin: carbamazepine chlorpromazine non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), eg indometacin SSRI antidepressants such as fluoxetine tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline. If you are taking desmopressin with any of these medicines you should carefully follow instructions about restricting your fluid intake, because these medicines may increase the risk of fluid retention and decreased concentration of sodium in the blood. Loperamide (used to treat diarrhoea) may increase the blood level of desmopressin taken by mouth. As a result, it may also increase the risk of fluid retention and decreased concentration of sodium in the blood. It should be avoided by people taking desmopressin tablets. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/liver-kidney-and-urinary-system/a6517/ddavp-tablets-desmopressin/ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desmopressin https://www.drugs.com/pro/ddavp.html http://patient.info/health/desmopressin-for-bedwetting http://www.medicinenet.com/desmopressin_tabs/article.htm https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/659 &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin