Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Condyline Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Condyline 0.5% Solution You are here: Home Condyline 0.5% Solution Condyline cutaneous solution contains the active ingredient podophyllotoxin, which is a medicine derived from the roots of the podophyllum plant. What is it used for? Genital warts. Warts in women and warts larger than 4cm² in men should be treated under direct medical supervision. How does it work? Condyline contains the active ingredient podophyllotoxin, which is a medicine derived from the roots of the podophyllum plant. The solution is applied directly to genital warts. It works by penetrating the wart tissue and preventing the wart cells from dividing and multiplying. Over time, all the wart cells die and new healthy tissue grows in their place. How do I use it? Condyline should be applied directly to the warts twice a day (morning and evening) for three days. Before each application wash the affected area with soap and water and allow to dry completely. To apply the medicine, dip the end of the plastic applicator stick, which has a hole in it, into the bottle, enough for the hole to be filled with solution. Apply this solution onto a wart and let it dry by itself. Cover all of the warts with solution in the same way, making sure that you do not use more than 50 “dips” in total. Take care to avoid getting the solution on healthy skin, or on broken, bleeding or inflamed skin. Wash your hands after application. If your warts have not improved or cleared up after the three days of treatment, your doctor may ask you to repeat this again one week later. The three day treatment can be repeated every week for up to five weeks. If the warts have not cleared up after five three-day treatment sessions you should consult your doctor. Not to be used in Pregnancy. Breastfeeding. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should not be used during pregnancy as it may be absorbed through the skin and be harmful to the unborn baby. Seek medical advice from your doctor. This medicine should not be used by breastfeeding mothers as it may absorbed through the skin and be harmful to the nursing infant. Seek further medical advice from your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Irritation in area of use, for example itching, burning, pain, redness or ulceration. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? This medicine is not known to affect other medicines. You should not use other podophyllin containing medicines at the same time as this one. References: https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1506/pil https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1507/smpc https://www.ouh.nhs.uk/patient-guide/leaflets/files/100722warticonsolution.pdf http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/spcpil/documents/spcpil/con1515129040189.pdf https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/infection/a6459/condyline-solution-podophyllotoxin/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Genital warts , Plantar warts , Warts Print This Page Health Reference Genital warts Plantar warts Warts Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin