Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Rabeprazole Radiation Therapy Radiosurgery Ramipril Tablets Ranitidine Tablets Raporsin Tablets (... Rasilez Tablets Razolager - Lansop... Razole - (Rabepraz... Rebif Injection Rectogesic Rectal... Regurin (trospium) Relpax - (Eletript... Relvar ellipta inh... Remicade Injection... Reminyl Requip Resolor (Prucalopr... Revlimid Rhinocort Nasal Sp... Rhinolast Nasal Sp... Rifadin Capsules Rifadin Syrup Rifinah Rilutek (riluzole) Rinatec Nasal Spra... Risonate Once Week... Risperidone - (Ris... Ritalin Ritechol - Simvast... Rivotril Tablets Roaccutane Tablets... RoActemra (tociliz... Rohypnol Romep - (Omeprazol... Rosuva - (Rosuvast... Rosuvastatin Rozex Cream/Gel Rustin - (Amlodipi... Medicine - R Rabeprazole Rabeprazole tablets contain the active ingredient rabeprazole, which is a type of medicine called a proton pump inhibitor. Rabeprazole is a generic medicine. Rabeprazole acts in the stomach to decrease the production of stomach acid. Radiation Therapy Radiation Therapy is the medical use of ionizing radiation as part of cancer treatment to control malignant cells. Radiosurgery Radiosurgery is a type of stereotactic radiotherapy, which aims radiotherapy beams very precisely at the tumour. Stereotactic radiotherapy is usually broken up into between 6 and 25 treatments. Ramipril Tablets Ramipril can be used for the following conditions: • To treat high blood pressure • To treat heart failure. • If you have recently had a heart attack • To treat kidney problems caused by Type II diabetes in people with high blood pressure. Ranitidine Tablets To&nbsp;heal and stop ulcers in the stomach, or the part of the gut it empties into (the duodenum) To stop stomach ulcers when they are a side effects of some medicines Raporsin Tablets (Doxazosin) Raporsin is one of a group of medicines called alpha-blockers. It is used to treat high blood pressure, or the symptoms caused by enlargement of the prostate gland in men. Rasilez Tablets This medicine is to help lower high blood pressure. Razolager - Lansoprazole Razolager stop cells in the lining of the stomach from producing too much acid. This can help prevent ulcers from forming or assist the healing process. By decreasing the amount of acid, they can also help to reduce acid reflux related symptoms such as heartburn. Razole - (Rabeprazole) Razole tablets contain the active ingredient rabeprazole, which is a type of medicine called a proton pump inhibitor. Razole is a generic medicine. Razole acts in the stomach to decrease the production of stomach acid. Rebif Injection Rebif (Interferon) is used for the treatment of relapsing multiple sclerosis. MS is said to be relapsing if you have had two or more acute episodes in the last two years. Rectogesic Rectal Ointment Rectogesic 4 mg/g Rectal Ointment is indicated in adults for relief of pain associated with chronic anal fissure. &nbsp; Regurin (trospium) Regurin tablets and Regurin XL prolonged release capsules both contain the active ingredient trospium chloride, which is a type of medicine called an anticholinergic (or antimuscarinic) muscle relaxant. It works by relaxing the involuntary muscle that is found in the wall of the bladder. Relpax - (Eletriptan) Relpax works by stimulating receptors called serotonin (or 5HT) receptors that are found in the brain. This improves the symptoms felt during a migraine. Relvar ellipta inhaler Relvar ellipta inhaler contains two active ingredients, fluticasone and vilanterol. Remicade Injection - (Infliximab) Remicade is used in adults for the following infl ammatory diseases: Rheumatoid arthritis, Psoriatic arthritis, Ankylosing spondylitis, Psoriasis, Ulcerative colitis. Remicade is also used in adults and children 6 years of age or older for: Crohn’s disease. Reminyl Reminyl is a drug prescribed to treat symptoms of mild to moderately severe dementia in Alzheimer’s. Requip Requip (Ropinirole) is used to treat Parkinson’s disease. Resolor (Prucalopride) Resolor tablets contain the active ingredient prucalopride, which is a type of medicine called a serotonin (or 5HT) agonist. Revlimid Revlimid in combination with dexamethasone is used to treat adult patients who have been diagnosed with multiple myeloma. Multiple myeloma is a type of blood cancer that affects the white blood cells that produce antibodies. Rhinocort Nasal Spray Rhinocort aqua nasal spray contains the active ingredient budesonide, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Corticosteroids are hormones produced naturally by the adrenal glands that have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Budesonide nasal spray is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin