Betnesol N Nose drops, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Betnesol-N Nose Drops You are here: Home Betnesol-N Nose Drops Betnesol-N eye, ear and nose drops contain two active ingredients, betamethasone and neomycin. Betamethasone belongs to a group of medicines known as corticosteroids that are used for reducing inflammation. Neomycin is an antibiotic that is included in these drops to prevent infections with bacteria. What is it used for? Short-term treatment of inflammatory eye conditions, when prevention of bacterial infection is also required. Inflammation of the outer ear (otitis externa), when prevention of bacterial infection is also required. Inflammatory conditions affecting the nose, when prevention of bacterial infection is also required. How does it work? Betnesol-N eye, ear and nose drops contain two active ingredients, betamethasone and neomycin. Betamethasone belongs to a group of medicines known as corticosteroids that are used for reducing inflammation. Neomycin is an antibiotic that is included in these drops to prevent infections with bacteria. Corticosteroids are hormones produced naturally by the adrenal glands that have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Betamethasone is a synthetic corticosteroid that can be adminstered into the eyes, ears or nose to decrease inflammation in these areas. Inflammation occurs as a result of allergy or irritation and is caused by the release of substances that are important in the immune system. These substances cause blood vessels to widen, resulting in the affected area becoming red, swollen, itchy and painful. Corticosteroids work by acting within cells to decrease the release of these substances in a particular area, thereby reducing swelling, redness and itch. Neomycin belongs to a group of antibiotics called aminoglycosides. These antibiotics have the ability to kill a wide variety of bacteria. Neomycin binds to components in the bacterial cell, which results in the production of abnormal proteins. These proteins are normally necessary for the bacteria's survival, therefore the production of abnormal proteins is ultimately fatal to the bacteria. The combination of medicines in Betnesol-N drops is used to treat inflammatory conditions of the eyes, ears or nose that are likely to become infected with bacteria. Use with caution in Children. Nasal conditions in people who have recently had nasal surgery. Eye conditions in people with thinning of the cornea or sclera (the tissues which cover the outer surface of the eye). Not to be used in Fungal or viral infections of the eyes, ears or nose. Tuberculosis infection affecting the eye. Eye conditions that are producing pus. Inflammation of the front of the eye (cornea) or the membrane lining the eye (conjunctiva) due to the herpes simplex virus (herpetic keratitis). Glaucoma. Ear conditions in people with a perforated eardrum. Nasal conditions in people with tuberculosis affecting the lungs. These drops should not be used to treat a red eye that has not been diagnosed by a doctor, as inappropriate use can cause blindness. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine for use during pregnancy and breastfeeding has not been established. It is not recommended for use during pregnancy or breastfeeding. Consult your doctor for further advice. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Possible side effects when the drops are used in the eyes are listed below. Local irritation, itching, stinging or burning sensation. Temporary blurred vision after putting the drops in the eye(s). Ulceration of the front part of the eye (cornea). Increase in the pressure inside the eye (glaucoma) which may lead to problems with your sight. If used in the eye frequently or for long periods of time, corticosteroids such as this one can cause partial loss of vision due to cloudiness in the lens of the eye (cataracts). Dilated pupils. Drooping of the eyelid. Inflammation of the outer surface of the eye. Possible side effects when the drops are used in the nose are listed below. Nasal irritation and dryness. Sneezing. Headache. Lightheadedness Itchy rash. Nausea. Nosebleeds. Asthma. Perforation or ulceration of the nasal septum Disturbance to sense of smell or taste. Slowing of growth has been reported in children. Children's height should be monitored if treatment with this medicine is prolonged. Possible side effects when the drops used in the ear are listed below. Local irritation, itching, stinging or burning sensation. Dermatitis. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. If you are using any other types of eye, ear or nose drop you should administer them at least five minutes apart, to prevent the second drop washing away the first. Use gels or ointments last. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/eyes/a6307/betnesol-n-eye-ear-nose-drops/ http://patient.info/medicine/betamethasone-ear-drops-betnesol-vistamethasone https://www.drugs.com/uk/betnesol-n-eye-ear-and-nose-drops-leaflet.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Eye Complaints Print This Page Health Reference Eye Complaints Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin