Decapeptyl, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Decapeptyl 3 Months injection You are here: Home Decapeptyl 3 Months injection Decapeptyl (triptorelin) is used in men for the treatment of a disease of the prostate, in women for the treatment of endometriosis and infertility, and in children for the treatment of precocious puberty. Why have I been prescribed Decapeptyl? Decapeptyl (triptorelin) is used in men for the treatment of a disease of the prostate, in women for the treatment of endometriosis and infertility, and in children for the treatment of precocious puberty. How does it work? It lowers the levels of the sex hormones in the body and thus suppresses testicular and ovarian functions. When and how do I take it? The doctor will inject the contents of one vial, made up in the solvent provided. The injection will usually be given in your buttock. It is not necessary to adjust the dose if you are elderly, or if your liver or kidneys do not work so well. In women, Decapeptyl must be started in the first five days of menstrual cycle. Please confirm this with your doctor. During the first month of treatment a non-hormonal contraceptive is necessary. What’s the dose? There are two different products with different doses. For Decapeptyl 3 Monthly : you will be given one injection every three months. Your doctor will decide for how long you need treatment. Men will be given their first injection in hospital. Women receiving treatment will not be given more than two injections (6 months treatment). Children will receive injection once every three months and the treatment will be stopped when you are about 12 if you are a girl and at about 13-14 if you are a boy. For Decapeptyl SR patients will receive one injection every month. In women receiving Decapeptyl for infertility you will get one injection at the beginning of your menstrual cycle. The other hormones (gonadotrophins) will usually be given approximately two weeks later. Could it interact with other tablets? Hyperprolactinemic drugs should not be taken at the same time as Decapeptyl eg Parlodel and Dostinex. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? As with all medicines, Decapeptyl 3-Month can cause unwanted and unpleasant effects in some patients. In men: At the start of the treatment, your symptoms (such as bone pain, urinary disorders) may get worse. This may happen even though the treatment is producing a favourable effect. However, you should tell your doctor immediately if this occurs. The most common undesirable effects reported in men are hot flushes, less desire for sex and impotence . Transient feelings of weakness, gastrointestinal disturbances, sweating, breast enlargement, hair loss, vertigo and transient high blood pressure may also occur. In women: At start of treatment, women may also experience a worsening of symptoms (pelvic pain, painful periods) even though the treatment is producing a favourable effect. This normally disappears after the first 1-2 weeks. The most common undesirable effects reported in women are hot flushes , vaginal dryness, less desire for sex, painful sex and irregular menstrual bleeding in the first month of treatment. After stopping treatment it may be some time before your periods return. Rare cases of headaches , joint and muscle pain have been reported. After stopping the treatment, it may be some time before menstrual bleeding returns. Talk to your doctor, as contraception may be required. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Decapeptyl. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? It has not been fully decided whether Decapeptyl is safe during pregnancy yet therefore your doctor will make the decision based on the benefits versus risk. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triptorelin http://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2147239.PPA0465_261_001.eec08fd3-490b-4685-951b-a2c7659e8b5f.000001PIL%20Decapeptyl%203-Month.140618.pdf http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/cancer/a6522/decapeptyl-sr-triptorelin/ http://xpil.medicines.org.uk/ViewPil.aspx?DocID=13849 https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/13851/SPC/Decapeptyl+SR+11.25mg/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin