Differin Gel/Cream, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Differin Cream/Gel You are here: Home Differin Cream/Gel Differin cream and gel both contain the active ingredient adapalene, which is a form of vitamin A used in the treatment of acne. What is Differin cream/gel used for? Mild to moderate acne. How does Differin cream/gel work? Differin cream and gel both contain the active ingredient adapalene, which is a form of vitamin A used in the treatment of acne. Acne is caused by blockage of sebaceous glands. This leads to an accumulation of the skins natural oils (sebum). Bacteria on the skin feed on sebum and produce waste products which further inflame the sebaceous glands, causing acne. Irritant substances can leak into the surrounding skin causing further inflammation. Adapalene reduces the growth of the keratin surface skin cells that can block pores. This helps to unblock the pores and sebaceous glands (glands which secrete sebum) and as a result the sebum can escape. This reduces the formation of blackheads (comedones) and spots. In addition, adapalene increases the turnover of the skin cells, which aids the natural exfoliation of the outer layers of skin. This also helps to unblock pores and decreases the formation of comedones and spots. Differin cream or gel should be applied only once a day before bedtime. Differin cream/gel should be used with caution in Sensitive skin. Differin cream/gel should not be used in People with known sensitivity or allergy to any ingredients. People with eczema. Pregnancy. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should not be used during pregnancy as it can be absorbed through the skin and may be harmful to the developing baby. Seek medical advice from your doctor. It is not known if this medicine passes into breast milk. It can be used by women who are breastfeeding, if considered to be essential by the doctor. If it is applied to the chest it should be washed off before breastfeeding and then reapplied afterwards. Possible side effects of Differin cream/gel Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Dry skin. Skin irritation. Burning sensation of the skin. Redness of skin. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Skin discomfort. Sunburn. Itching (pruritus). Peeling of the skin. Worsening of acne. Unknown frequency Pain or swelling of skin. Irritation, redness, itching or swelling of eyelids. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist.If they think it's necessary they'll report it for you. How can Differin cream/gel&nbsp; affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start taking this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while using this one, to ensure that the combination is safe. Skin preparations such as medicated cosmetics, soaps, cleansers, toiletries and other acne preparations, particularly those containing high concentrations of alcohol or astringents, should be used with caution in combination with this medicine, as they are likely to have a cumulative drying or irritant effect on the skin. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6568/differin-cream-gel-adapalene/ https://www.drugs.com/cdi/differin-cream.html https://www.differin.com &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Acne Print This Page Health Reference Acne Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin