Cefpodoxime, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cefodox (cefpodoxime) You are here: Home Cefodox (cefpodoxime) Orelox tablets and paediatric oral suspension contain the active ingredient cefpodoxime, which is a type of medicine called an antibiotic. Cefpodoxime is a type of antibiotic called a cephalosporin. These antibiotics are related to penicillin. Cefpodoxime is used to treat infections wih bacteria. What is it used for? Bacterial infections of the lungs, eg acute bronchitis, flare-ups of chronic bronchitis, pneumonia. Bacterial infections of the ears, nose or throat, eg otitis media, sinusitis, pharyngitis, tonsillitis. Bacterial infections of the urinary tract or kidneys (pyelonephritis). Gonorrhoea. Bacterial infections of the skin or soft tissue, eg abscesses, boils, cellulitis, folliculitis, infected wounds or ulcers. How does it work? Orelox tablets and paediatric oral suspension contain the active ingredient cefpodoxime, which is a type of medicine called an antibiotic. Cefpodoxime is a type of antibiotic called a cephalosporin. These antibiotics are related to penicillin. Cefpodoxime is used to treat infections wih bacteria. Cefpodoxime works by interfering with the ability of bacteria to form cell walls. The cell walls of bacteria are vital for their survival. They keep unwanted substances from entering their cells and stop the contents of their cells from leaking out. Cefpodoxime impairs the bonds that hold the bacterial cell wall together. This allows holes to appear in the cell walls and kills the bacteria. Cefpodoxime is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that kills a wide variety of bacteria that cause a wide variety of commonly-occuring infections. Cefpodoxime is given by mouth to treat infections of the upper and lower airways, skin and soft tissue. It may also be used to treat urinary tract infections. To make sure the bacteria causing an infection are susceptible to cefpodoxime your doctor may take a tissue sample, for example a swab from the throat or skin, or a urine, sputum or blood sample. How do I take it? The dose of this medicine and how long it needs to be taken for depends on the type of infection you have, your age and your kidney function. Follow the instructions given by your doctor. These will be printed on the dispensing label that your pharmacist has put on the packet of medicine. Cefpodoxime is usually taken twice a day (every 12 hours). Each dose should be taken with food. Orelox tablets should be swallowed with liquid. Bottles of suspension should be shaken before measuring out a dose. Only use the measuring spoon provided with the medicine. You should not use a regular teaspoon or tablespoon to give the medicine, as this will not give an accurate dose. Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, it is important that you finish the prescribed course of this antibiotic medicine, even if you feel better or it seems the infection has cleared up. Stopping the course early increases the chance that the infection will come back and that the bacteria will grow resistant to the antibiotic. Use with caution in Decreased kidney function. Allergy to penicillin-type antibiotics. Not to be used in Allergy to other cephalosporin-type antibiotics. Babies under 15 days old, as the medicine has not been studied in this age group. Orelox suspension is not suitable for people with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, fructose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency, glucose-galactose malabsorption or sucrase-isomaltase insufficiency. Orelox suspension contains aspartame and is not suitable for people with an inherited disorder of protein metabolism called phenylketonuria. Orelox tablets contain lactose and are not suitable for people with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine is not known to be harmful when used by pregnant women. However, as with all medicines, it should be used with caution during pregnancy and only when considered essential by your doctor, particularly during the first trimester. Seek medical advice from your doctor. This medicine passes into breast milk. It is not known to be harmful if used during breastfeeding, however it should be used with caution in breastfeeding mothers and only if the expected benefit to the mother is greater than any possible risk to the nursing infant. Seek medical advice from your doctor. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Diarrhoea. Nausea. Vomiting. Abdominal pain. Rash or hives. Itching. Headache. Dizziness. Sensation of ringing or other noise in the ears (tinnitus). Pins and needles sensations. Feeling weak. Allergic reaction to active ingredient. Fever. Joint pain. Inflammation of the large intestine (colitis) - see warning section above. Severe allergic skin reactions. Disturbances in the numbers of blood cells in the blood. Prolonged treatment with antibiotics can sometimes cause overgrowth of other organisms that are not susceptible to the antibiotic, for example fungi or yeasts such as Candida. This may sometimes cause infections such as thrush. Tell your doctor if you think you have developed a new infection during or after taking this antibiotic. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. How can this medicine affect other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while taking this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. Antacids and H2 antagonists, such as cimetidine, famotidine and ranitidine, may reduce the absorption of cefpodoxime from the gut and thus make it less effective at treating infection. These medicines should not be taken within two to three hours of taking cefpodoxime. In the past, women using hormonal contraception such as the pill or patch would be advised to use an extra method of contraception (eg condoms) while taking an antibiotic like this one and for seven days after finishing the course. However, this advice has now changed. You no longer need to use an extra method of contraception with the pill, patch or vaginal ring while you take a course of antibiotics. This change in advice comes because to date there is no evidence to prove that antibiotics (other than rifampicin or rifabutin) affect these contraceptives. This is the latest guidance from the Faculty of Sexual &amp; Reproductive Healthcare. However, if you are taking the contraceptive pill and experience vomiting or diarrhoea as a result of taking this antibiotic, you should follow the instructions for vomiting and diarrhoea described in the leaflet provided with your pills. Broad spectrum antibiotics such as cefpodoxime may enhance the effect of anticoagulant medicines to prevent blood clots, such as warfarin. If you are taking warfarin your doctor may want you to have your blood clotting time (INR) checked more frequently while taking this antibiotic. Oral typhoid vaccine (Vivotif) should not be taken until at least three days after you have finished a course of this antibiotic, because the antibiotic could make this vaccine less effective. Probenecid may increase the blood level of cefpodoxime. References: http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/infections/a7279/orelox-cefpodoxime/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/30851 http://www.pic-jo.com/files/129520105917543750.pdf http://www.megacom.com.ua/en/tsefodoks/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin