Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Bisolvon Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Bisolvon Oral Solution You are here: Home Bisolvon Oral Solution Bisolvon helps you to breathe more easily when you have breathing problems such as bronchitis or sinusitis. It works by making your mucus thinner so that you can get rid of it more easily. How to take Bisolvol Always take this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you. You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. Taking this medicine Take this medicine only by mouth. To make sure you use the right&nbsp;amount, use the measuring cup&nbsp;provided to measure your dose If you prefer, you can use&nbsp;a 5 ml plastic spoon&nbsp;to use instead Remove the measuring cup from the&nbsp;bottle cap before use Fill the measuring cup up to the 5 ml&nbsp;line Rinse the measuring cup with water&nbsp;after use How much to take:&nbsp;Children between 2 and 5 years The usual dose is 5 ml two times a day Children between 5 and 12 years The usual dose is 5 ml four times a day Adults The usual dose starts from 10 ml three times a day However, you could be asked to take up to 15 ml four times a day. Your doctor will tell you exactly how much you need to take If you think this medicine is not working well enough If your medicine does not seem to be working for you, talk to your doctor as soon as possible. Do not take extra Bisolvon unless your doctor tells you to. If you take more Bisolvon than you should If you take more of this medicine than you should, talk to a doctor or go to a hospital straight away. Take the medicine container with you even if there is no Bisolvon left. If you forget to take Bisolvon If you forget a dose, take it as soon as you remember it However, if it is nearly time for the next dose, skip the missed dose Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose Side effects Stop taking Bisolvon and see a doctor straight away if you notice any of the following serious side effects – you may need urgent medical treatment: Serious allergic reactions that may cause swelling of face or throat, wheezing or sudden difficulties in breathing Skin lesions such as severe blistering or peeling of your skin, mouth, throat, nose, eyes and genitals If you notice any of these, stop taking Bisolvon and see a doctor straight away. Other side effects Uncommon Feeling sick (nausea) or being sick&nbsp;(vomiting) Pain in the upper part of your abdomen Diarrhoea Rare Hypersensitivity reactions Rash Urticaria The following side effects can also happen but the frequency of these is not known Anaphylactic reactions including anaphylactic shock, angioedema&nbsp; Severe cutaneous adverse reactions&nbsp; Tightness of your chest Pruritus In addition, an expected increase in the flow of mucus secretion will result from taking bisolvon. Contraindications Bisolvon Oral Solution is contraindicated in patients known to be hypersensitive to bromhexine or other components of the formulation. Interactions No clinically relevant unfavourable interactions with other medications, such as ampicillin, amoxicillin, oxytetracycline or erythromycin, have been reported. Pregnancy and Breast feeding Pregnancy There are limited data from the use of bromhexine in pregnant women. Pre-clinical studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to reproductive toxicity. As a precautionary measure, it is preferable to avoid the use of Bisolvon during pregnancy. Lactation It is unknown whether bromhexine/metabolites are excreted in human milk. A risk to the breastfed infant cannot be excluded. Bisolvon should not be used during breast-feeding. Effects on ability to drive and use machines No studies on the effect on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed with Bisolvon. Shelf life Unopened : 3 years. In-use: Use within 12 months of opening bottle. Special precautions for storage Store in the original container. References: https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2173773.PA0007_025_002.aa7cc0c2-c2ff-4b55-80c9-8e666ce5f551.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved.160429.pdf https://www.medicines.ie/medicines/bisolvon-oral-solution-31446/ https://www.nps.org.au/medicine-finder/bisolvon-chesty-kids-oral-liquid &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Cough Print This Page Health Reference Cough Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin