Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis You are here: Home Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis causes persistent joint pain, swelling and stiffness. Some children may experience symptoms for only a few months, while others have symptoms for the rest of their lives. What is it? Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, also known as juvenile idiopathic arthritis, is the most common type of arthritis in children under the age of 16. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis causes persistent joint pain, swelling and stiffness. Some children may experience symptoms for only a few months, while others have symptoms for the rest of their lives. There are several types of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, each classified according to: The number of joints affected The signs and symptoms The results of blood tests Some types of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis can cause serious complications, such as growth problems and eye inflammation. Treatment of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis focuses on controlling pain, improving function and preventing joint damage. Symptoms The most common signs and symptoms of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis are: Pain . While your child might not complain of joint pain, you may notice that he or she limps — especially first thing in the morning or after a nap. Swelling . This sign is most often seen in the knees, but the small joints of the hands and feet also can be affected. Stiffness . You might notice that your child appears more clumsy than usual. There are three main types of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis: Oligoarthritis . This variety affects fewer than five joints during the first six months of the disease. It also is the variety most likely to feature eye inflammation, which can cause blindness in rare cases. Polyarthritis . This variety affects five or more joints during the first six months of the disease. Signs and symptoms are usually confined to the joints. Systemic . Formerly known as Still's disease, this type can feature swollen lymph nodes, rashes and fever — which may come and go quickly. It can also cause inflammation of internal organs. Like other forms of arthritis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by times when symptoms flare up and times when symptoms disappear. Causes Doctors believe that juvenile rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder. This means that the body's immune system attacks its own cells and tissues. It's unknown why this happens, but both heredity and environment seem to play a role. Certain gene mutations may make a person more susceptible to environmental factors — such as viruses — that may trigger the disease. Risk factors Risk factors for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis include: Sex . In general, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis is more common in girls. Race . Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis appears to be more common in white children than in black or Asian children. Complications Several serious complications can result from juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. But keeping a careful watch on your child's condition and seeking appropriate medical attention can greatly reduce the risk of these complications: Eye problems . Some forms of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis can cause eye inflammation. If this condition is left untreated, it may result in cataracts, glaucoma and even blindness. Eye inflammation frequently occurs without symptoms, so it's important for children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis to be examined regularly by an ophthalmologist. Growth interference . Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis can interfere with the development of your child's bones and growth. Some medications used to treat juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, mainly corticosteroids, also can inhibit growth. Diagnosis Diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis can be difficult because joint pain can be caused by many different types of problems. No single test can confirm a diagnosis, but tests can help rule out some other conditions that produce similar signs and symptoms. Blood tests Some of the most common blood tests for suspected cases of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis include: Erythrocyte sedimentation (sed) rate . Sedimentation rate is the speed at which your red blood cells settle to the bottom of a tube. An elevated rate can indicate inflammation. Measuring the sed rate may be used to rule out other conditions, to help classify the type of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and to determine the degree of inflammation. Anti-nuclear antibody . Anti-nuclear antibodies are proteins commonly produced by the immune systems of people with certain autoimmune diseases, including arthritis. Rheumatoid factor . This antibody is commonly found in the blood of adults who have rheumatoid arthritis. In many children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, no significant abnormality will be found in these blood tests. Imaging scans X-rays may be taken to exclude other conditions, such as: Fractures Tumours Infection Congenital defects X-rays may also be used from time to time after the diagnosis to monitor bone development and to detect joint damage. Joint fluid removal The doctor may use a needle to remove some fluid from your child's swollen joint. Analysis of the joint fluid can help the doctor identify the cause of the arthritis. References http://www.rheumatology.org/I-Am-A/Patient-Caregiver/Diseases-Conditions/Juvenile-Arthritis http://www.webmd.com/rheumatoid-arthritis/diagnosing-juvenile-arthritis http://www.arthritis.org/about-arthritis/types/juvenile-arthritis/ https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/R/Rheumatoid-arthritis/Rheumatoid-arthritis-Treatment.html Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Ibuprofen (Nurofen/Melfen/Brufen) Tablets When to call the GP - For the Parents of Baby&#039;s Medicine Reference Methotrexate Tablets Enbrel Injection Humira Injection Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin