Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Gabapentin Capsule... Galfer Capsules Galvus - (Vildagli... Gamanil 70mg Table... Gaviscon infant Sa... Gaviscon Liquid/Ta... Geltears Generic Medicine Genotropin (Somatr... Genticin Ear/Eye D... Geramox - Amoxycil... Gericarb SR Geriflox Capsules/... Germentin Tablets/... Gerozac - (Fluoxet... Gertac (Ranitidine... Gilenya (fingolimo... Gingko Ginseng Glibenese Glivic (Imatinib)... Glucobay Glucophage Tablets Glucosamine and Ch... Glytrin Spray Gonal-F (Follitrop... Gonasi (human chor... Greater Celandine Gyno-Daktarin Crea... Medicine - G Gabapentin Capsules Gabapentin belongs to a group of medicines used to treat epilepsy and peripheral neuropathic pain (long lasting pain caused by damage to the nerves). The active ingredient in Gabapentin is gabapentin. Galfer Capsules Galfer capsules and syrup both contain the active ingredient ferrous fumarate, which is a form of iron. Galvus - (Vildagliptin) Galvus tablets contain the active ingredient vildagliptin, which is a type of medicine called a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor. It is used to treat type 2 or non-insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM). Gamanil 70mg Tablets Gamanil (Gamanil) is used to treat depression, anxiety and panic disorders. Gaviscon infant Sachets This medicine helps stop reflux, which is when your baby's stomach contents flow back up into their foodpipe, causing them to be sick after feeds. Gaviscon Liquid/Tablets Gaviscon is the only antacid product that provides fast-acting, long-lasting heartburn relief .&nbsp; It quickly neutralizes stomach acid and helps keep acid down for hours. Geltears Geltears eye gel contains the active ingredient carbomer, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. It is used for the treatment of the symptoms of dry eye (such as soreness, burning, irritation or dryness) caused by your eye not producing enough tears to keep the eye wet. Generic Medicine Medicines will often have more than one name: a generic name, which is the active ingredient of the medicine, a brand name, which is the trade name the manufacturer gives to the medicine. The generic name is the official medical name for the active ingredient of the medicine. Genotropin (Somatropin) Genotropin is used to treat growth failure in children and adults who lack natural growth hormone. Genticin Ear/Eye Drops Genticin eye/ear drops contain the active ingredient gentamicin, which is a type of medicine called an aminoglycoside antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Geramox - Amoxycillin Geramox is a penicillin antibiotic. It fights bacteria in your body. Geramox is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria, such as ear infections, bladder infections, pneumonia, gonorrhea, and E. coli or salmonella infection. Gericarb SR The active ingredient of Gericarb SR is carbamazepine. Carbamazepine is one of a group of medicines called anticonvulsants. It is used to treat epilepsy. Carbamazepine is also used to treat a painful condition of the face (trigeminal neuralgia) and also may be used to help prevent mood swings. Geriflox Capsules/Suspension Geriflox is used to treat bacterial infections such as infections of the skin, chest and throat. It works by killing or stopping the growth of bacteria that cause the infection. Germentin Tablets/Suspension Germentin is a generic brand of Augmentin. Germentin is a medicine which is used in certain types of bacterial infections. Germentin contains amoxicillin trihydrate/potassium clavulanate. Gerozac - (Fluoxetine) Gerozac (Fluoxetine) is used to treat the following conditions: • Major depressive episodes • Obsessive-compulsive disorder • Bulimia nervosa: Gerozac is used alongside psychotherapy for the reduction of binge-eating and purging Gertac (Ranitidine) Tablets Gertac is used to treat various stomach problems involving irritation due to stomach acid. Gilenya (fingolimod) Gilenya capsules contain the active ingredient fingolimod, which is a type of medicine called an immunomodulator. Gingko Ginkgo biloba has been used medicinally for thousands of years. The scientific literature overall does suggest that ginkgo may benefit people with dementia, and may be as helpful as drugs such as Aricept. Ginseng Several studies report a blood sugar-lowering effect of American ginseng (Panax quinquefolium) in individuals with type 2 diabetes and hyperglycemia. Future research is needed to evaluate long-term..... Glibenese Glibenese (Glipizide) is used to lower blood sugar (glucose) in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM for short). This is also called maturity-onset (adult) or Type II diabetes. It is always used in addition to a diet which restricts sugars and fats. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin