Exjade, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Exjade Dispersible Tablets You are here: Home Exjade Dispersible Tablets Deferasirox (Exjade) is an oral iron chelator. Its main use is to reduce chronic iron overload in patients who are receiving long-term blood transfusions for conditions such as beta-thalassemia and other chronic anaemias. What is Exjade? EXJADE is indicated for the treatment of chronic iron overload due to frequent blood transfusions (≥ 7 ml/kg/month of packed red blood cells) in patients with beta thalassemia major aged 6 years and older. EXJADE is also indicated for the treatment of chronic iron overload due to blood transfusions when deferoxamine therapy is contraindicated or inadequate in the following patient groups: in patients with beta thalassemia major with iron overload due to frequent blood transfusions (≥7 ml/kg/month of packed red blood cells) aged 2 to 5 years in patients with beta thalassemia major with iron overload due to infrequent blood transfusions (&lt;7 ml/kg/month of packed red blood cells) aged 2 years and older in patients with other anemias aged 2 years and older EXJADE is also indicated for the treatment of chronic iron overload requiring chelation therapy when deferoxamine therapy is contraindicated or inadequate in patients with non-trans fusion-dependent thalassemia syndromes aged 10 years and older. What is the dosage? Titrate and monitor to reach chelation goals Monitor serum ferritin monthly and assess trends with steady-state levels Titrate EXJADE by steps of 5 mg/kg/day to 10 mg/kg/day every 3 to 6 months based on individual patient's response and therapeutic goals (maintenance or reduction of iron) EXJADE is approved at doses up to 40 mg/kg/day for patients not adequately controlled with doses of 30 mg/kg (eg, serum ferritin levels persistently above 2,500 µg/L and not showing a decreasing trend over time) Doses above 40 mg/kg are not recommended because there is only limited experience with doses above this level Dose reductions, in steps of 5 to 10 mg/kg, should be considered in patients whose serum ferritin levels have reached the target (usually between 500 and 1000 µg/L) in order to maintain serum ferritin levels within the target range References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deferasirox http://www.exjade.com/about-exjade/safety.jsp &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin