Dalmapan, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dalmapam - Flurazepam You are here: Home Dalmapam - Flurazepam Dalmapam (Flurazepam) is used for the short term treatment of sleeplessness or insomnia. It can help overcome any difficulties in getting to sleep and may help if you wake up frequently in the middle of the night. Why have I been prescribed Dalmane? Dalmapam (Flurazepam) is used for the short term treatment of sleeplessness or insomnia . It can help overcome any difficulties in getting to sleep and may help if you wake up frequently in the middle of the night. Please note, that Dalmapam relieves the above mentioned symptoms but does not cure the underlying cause of your insomnia. How does it work? Dalmapam belongs to a group of medicines called benzodiazepines. These work by increasing the amount of a certain chemical in the brain which calms the brain down and stops the nerves firing inappropriately. When and how do I take it? Take the medicine just before going to bed and swallow the capsule whole, together with a drink of water or another&nbsp;non-alcoholic drink. If you forget to take one dose, you should never make up for the missing dose by doubling the dose next time. Instead you should simply continue with the next dose when it is due remembering that the maximum dose is 30 mg every 24&nbsp;hours. Ensure you will be able to have an uninterrupted sleep of 7 to 8 hours when taking the capsules. Do not change the prescribed dose yourself. If you think the effect of your medicine is too weak or too strong, talk to&nbsp;your doctor. What’s the dose? The dose your doctor prescribes will depend on the nature of your illness, your reaction to the medicine, your age and bodyweight. The normal starting dose is 15 mg which if necessary may be increased to a maximum of 30 mg. If you are elderly or suffer from a lung, liver or kidney condition or are generally unwell your starting dose should not exceed 15 mg. Your doctor will find the lowest dose to control your symptoms. You may not need to take this medicine every&nbsp;night. Treatment will not normally be continued for more than four weeks. Could it interact with other tablets? You are taking any other medicines, including those not prescribed by your doctor. This is extremely important, as using more than one medicine at the same time can strengthen or weaken the effect of the medicines involved. For example, tranquillisers, sleep-inducing drugs and other such medications which act on the brain and nerves can intensify the effect of Dalmapam. Dalmapam may also be affected by medicines used to treat stomach problems, e.g. cimetidine, certain antibiotics, e.g. rifampicin and by medicines used to treat epilepsy . Dalmapam may also be affected by drugs that relieve pain (analgesics), anaesthetics, antidepressants and drugs used in the treatment of allergies (antihistamines). Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Side effects include: drowsiness during the day a feeling of emptiness confusion tiredness headache dizziness muscle weakness poor muscle co-ordination changes in vision These effects are likely to occur at the start of the treatment and usually disappear after a while. In rare cases, changes in behaviour, including aggression, excitement, confusion, restlessness, agitation, delusions, irritability, rages, hallucinations and nightmares may occur. If these symptoms occur, you must inform your doctor. He/she may want you to stop taking this medicine. Other unwanted effects, which can also occur rarely, include: giddiness reduced blood pressure stomach upsets skin rashes changes in vision changes in the level of sexual desire inability to pass urine/holding of urine in the bladder jaundice blood disorders unexplained changes in behaviour memory loss if you are woken up too early Can I drink alcohol while taking it? Do not drink alcohol with this medicine. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Do not take this medicine if you are pregnant, or might become pregnant. Dalmapam passes into breast-milk, therefore, if you are breast-feeding this medicine should be avoided. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note:&nbsp; We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.rxlist.com/dalmane-drug/indications-dosage.htm https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flurazepam http://www.drugs.com/cdi/dalmane.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/10535 &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Insomnia Print This Page Health Reference Insomnia Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin