Evista, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Evista Tablets You are here: Home Evista Tablets Evista (raloxifene) is used to treat and prevent osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Evista reduces the risk of vertebral fractures in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis. Why have I been prescribed Evista? Evista (raloxifene) is used to treat and prevent osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Evista reduces the risk of vertebral fractures in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis. How does it work? When a woman reaches the menopause, the level of the female sex hormone oestrogen goes down. Evista mimics some of the helpful effects of oestrogen after the menopause. When and how do I take it? It does not matter what time of day you take your tablet but taking the tablet at the same time each day will help you remember to take it. You may take it with or without food. The tablets are for oral use. Swallow the tablet whole. If you wish you may take a glass of water with it. What’s the dose? The dose is one tablet a day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. If you are taking digitalis medicines for your heart or anticoagulants like warfarin to thin your blood, your doctor may need to adjust your dose of these medicines. Tell your doctor if you are taking cholestyramine which is mainly used as lipid-lowering medicine. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, EVISTA can cause side effects although not everybody gets them. The majority of side effects seen with EVISTA have been mild. The most common side effects (affects more than 1 user in 10) are: Hot flushes (vasodilatation) Flu syndrome Common side effects (affects 1 to 10 users in 100) are: Leg cramps Swelling of hands, feet and legs (peripheral oedema) Gallstones If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Raloxifene hydrochloride. Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Evista is for use only by postmenopausal women and must not be taken by women who could still have a baby. Evista could harm your unborn child. Do not take Evista if you are breast-feeding as it might be excreted in mother's milk. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.breastcancer.org/treatment/hormonal/serms/evista http://www.drugs.com/evista.html http://www.rxlist.com/evista-drug.htm http://www.medicinenet.com/raloxifene/article.htm http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm088593.pdf &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Osteoporosis Print This Page Health Reference Osteoporosis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin