Antifungal Medicines, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Antifungal medicines You are here: Home Antifungal medicines There are several different antifungal preparations that are used to treat various fungal infections.They come as creams, shampoos, pessaries, medicines to take by mouth, and injections. What are fungal infections? Fungal infections of the skin, nail, mouth and vagina Many types of fungal germs (fungi) live harmlessly in the soil, on food, on our skin and in other places in the environment. However, some types of fungi can thrive and multiply on the surface of the body, to cause infection of the skin, nails, mouth or vagina. The most common fungi to cause skin infections are the tinea group of fungi. For example, tinea pedis ( athlete's foot ) is a common fungal infection of the toes and feet. A common fungal infection of the mouth and vagina is called thrush. This is caused by an overgrowth of candida which is a yeast (a type of fungus). Small numbers of candida commonly live on the skin. However, certain conditions can cause candida to multiply and cause infection. There are a number of leaflets giving details of the common fungal infections - for example, see leaflets called 'Fungal Nail Infection' and ' Ringworm of the Scalp ' and 'Athlete's Foot'. Fungal infections within the body Fungal infections of the skin, nails, vagina and mouth are quite common, but are rarely serious and don't usually spread deeper into the body. If you are otherwise healthy and have a normal immune system, it is rare for fungi to affect internal organs. However, fungal infections of the heart, lung, brain and other organs sometimes do occur. These internal fungal infections can be serious and, sometimes, life-threatening. Various types of fungus can cause internal infections. For example: Aspergillosis most commonly affects the lungs, but sometimes infects other organs. Cryptococcosis is uncommon, but can cause meningitis . Histoplasmosis is rare, but can cause serious infections of the lung and other organs. You are more at risk of developing an internal fungal infection if your immune system does not work properly. For example, if you are taking chemotherapy , if you have HIV/AIDS , etc. Some people with a poor immune system are prescribed regular antifungal medication to prevent serious fungal infections from developing. What are antifungal medicines and how do they work? There are several types of antifungal medicines. They come as creams, pessaries (a tablet designed to go into the vagina), shampoos, medicines to take by mouth, and injections. Most work by damaging the cell wall of the fungus, which causes the fungal cell to die. People who are prescribed an antifungal injection are usually in hospital and are very ill. Antifungal creams pessaries, or sprays (topical antifungals) These are used to treat fungal infections of the skin and vagina. They include: clotrimazole, econazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, tioconazole, terbinafine, nystatin, amorolfine and griseofulvin. They come in various different brand names. Sometimes an antifungal cream is combined with other creams when two actions are required. For example, an antifungal cream is often combined with a mild steroid cream, such as hydrocortisone, to treat certain rashes. The antifungal cream clears the infection, and the mild steroid cream reduces the inflammation caused by the infection. Antifungal shampoo A shampoo which contains ketoconazole is sometimes used to treat scalp fungal infections. Antifungal medicines taken by mouth There are various types. For example: Miconazole comes as an oral gel, and nystatin come as a liquid. Neither of these medicines is absorbed through the gut into the body. They are used to treat candidal infections (thrush) of the mouth and throat. Terbinafine, itraconazole, fluconazole, ketoconazole, griseofulvin, posaconazole, and voriconazole come as tablets, which are absorbed into the body. They are used to treat various fungal infections. The one chosen depends on what type of infection you have. For example:&nbsp; Terbinafine is commonly used to treat nail infections which are usually caused by a tinea type of fungus. Fluconazole is commonly used to treat vaginal thrush, as an alternative to using antifungal cream. It is also used to treat and prevent certain fungal infections within the body. What are the possible side-effects? You should read the information leaflet that comes with your particular brand for a full list of cautions and possible side-effects. As a general rule: Antifungal creams and shampoos. These usually cause no side-effects and are easy to use. Occasionally, some women develop irritation around the vagina after applying vaginal antifungal products. Antifungal medicines by mouth. The most widely used are terbinafine for nail infections , miconazole, and nystatin for oral thrush, and fluconazole for vaginal thrush. These usually cause no side-effects. You can even buy fluconazole without a prescription at pharmacies, as it is considered a medicine which is unlikely to cause problems. Some antifungal preparations cause liver problems or other side-effects in a small number of people. Antifungal injections. These have more risk of causing side-effects and sometimes serious problems. However, these are used to treat serious fungal infections and the risk of side-effects needs to be balanced against the need for treatment. Who cannot take or use antifungal medicines? Most people are able to use topical antifungals and take oral antifungals. However, even if you are unable to take one antifungal, your doctor can usually can find one to suit you. Some oral antifungals may interact with other medicines that you might take. This may cause reactions, or reduce the effectiveness of one or other of the treatments. So, when you are prescribed an antifungal, you should tell a doctor if you take other medicines. References: http://www.patient.co.uk/health/antifungal-medicines http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antifungal_medication http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antifungal http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Antifungal-drugs/Pages/Introduction.aspx &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Athletes Foot , Oral thrush , Vaginal yeast infection , Jock itch , Ringworm-body Print This Page Health Reference Athletes Foot Oral thrush Vaginal yeast infection Jock itch Ringworm-body Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin