Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Dona Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dona Sachets You are here: Home Dona Sachets Dona Glucosamine is a patented formulation of glucosamine sulfate that is clinically proven to reduce the pain and assist in the management of osteoarthritis. Dona Sachets may also help to maintain joint health and rebuild cartilage that has been worn away by progressive age or injury. What DONA Glucosamine is used for DONA Glucosamine contains glucosamine sulfate-sodium chloride complex – the stabilised crystalline form of glucosamine sulfate which is clinically proven to assist in the relief of the symptoms of osteoarthritis of the knee, hip, spine and hands. It acts on both the signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis, helps in building and maintaining healthy cartilage which is essential for healthy function of the joints, and may reduce the breakdown of existing cartilage. DONA Glucosamine may reduce inflammation, aid in the management of swelling and tenderness, may assist with the symptomatic relief of pain associated with osteoarthritis, and has demonstrated improvement in the mobility of joints. It has been shown to rebuild damaged cartilage, thus restoring articular function. Before you use DONA Glucosamine When you must not use it Since glucosamine is obtained from shellfish, people who are allergic to shellfish should not take this medicine. Do not take DONA Glucosamine tablets or powder for oral solution if you are hypersensitive to glucosamine or to any of the excipient ingredients listed in the Product Description section. DONA Glucosamine powder for oral solution in sachets contains aspartame, a source of phenylalanine, therefore people with phenylketonuria should consider taking DONA Glucosamine tablets instead. DONA Glucosamine powder for oral solution in sachets also contains sorbitol, therefore people who have an intolerance to some sugars should consult their health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist before taking the medicine. Do not use this medicine after the expiry date printed on the pack or if the packaging is torn or shows signs of tampering. In that case, return it to your pharmacist or retailer. Before you start to use Tell your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist if you have any of the following medical problems or conditions: you or your family have a history of hypersensitivity to seafood, glucosamine, sorbitol or other ingredients of DONA Glucosamine. phenylketonuria, where your ability to break down the amino acid phenylalanine is impaired. diabetes. Closer monitoring of blood sugar levels may be necessary when glucosamine is first taken. severe liver or kidney problems, so that your hepatic (liver) or renal (kidney) function can be checked regularly by your doctor while you are taking glucosamine. asthma. Glucosamine should be used with caution by asthmatic patients since they may be more susceptible to develop allergic reactions to glucosamine, with a possible worsening of their symptoms. you are pregnant or breast-feeding. There is inadequate data on glucosamine use during pregnancy or lactation. other joint diseases, which require other treatment. you are on a controlled sodium diet. The recommended daily dose of DONA Glucosamine contains 151 mg of sodium in a sachet of powder for oral solution, or 155 mg of sodium from 2 tablets. Taking other medicines You should always tell your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are taking, including medicines that you buy without a prescription from a pharmacy. The absorption of tetracyclines and the effect of coumarinic anticoagulants (such as warfarin) may increase when taken together with glucosamine sulfate, but it is unlikely that DONA Glucosamine and other medicines will interact with each other. How to take DONA Glucosamine Powder for oral solution: The recommended daily dose is one sachet per day. Dissolve the contents of one sachet in a glass of water (approximately 250 mL) and drink it up, preferably during a meal. Tablets: Take two tablets per day unless directed otherwise by your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist. Swallow the tablets whole with plenty of water or suitable liquid, preferably during either morning or evening meals. DONA Glucosamine is not recommended for children or adolescents under 18 years old where efficacy and safety has not been established. How long to take it Improvement of symptoms may be expected after 4 weeks of treatment, with optimal effects on joint mobility usually observed after 12 weeks. DONA Glucosamine can be continued long term to maintain the physical benefits. If you stop taking DONA, your symptoms may re-occur. If symptoms persist, or the condition recurs, consult your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist. If you forget to take it If it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose as planned. Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember then continue your normal routine. Do not take a double dose to compensate for the forgotten one. If you take too much (overdose) If you think you or anyone else has taken too much, or are suffering signs of discomfort or poisoning, immediately telephone your doctor or go to Accident and Emergency at your nearest hospital. While you are taking DONA Glucosamine Things you must do You should remind all health care practitioners, doctors, and pharmacists who are treating you for any condition that you are taking DONA Glucosamine, especially if you are starting, stopping or changing the dose of any other medicine. The effect of warfarin (a drug used to prevent blood clotting) may increase during treatment with glucosamine. Your doctor may consider measuring your blood clotting status more frequently. If you become pregnant while you are using DONA Glucosamine, tell your health care practitioner, doctor and pharmacist. They can discuss with you the risks of using it while you are pregnant. If the symptoms of your osteoarthritis persist, seems to be getting worse or reappear, speak to your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist. Things you must not do Do not give this medicine to anyone else, even if their symptoms seem to be the same as yours. Do not use it to treat any other complaints unless your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist tells you to. Effects on ability to drive and operate machinery DONA Glucosamine has no known effects in these situations, but refrain from driving or operating machinery if you experience side effects such as dizziness or drowsiness that can interfere with these activities. Possible side effects Clinical trials with DONA Glucosamine have shown the medicine to be well tolerated. Undesirable effects have been observed in a low proportion of patients and were usually mild and transient. The most common side effects are nausea, abdominal pain, indigestion, flatulence, constipation, diarrhoea, headache, tiredness and drowsiness. Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in some patients and included skin rashes with itching and redness. You should inform your health care practitioner, doctor or pharmacist if you notice anything that is making you feel unwell while taking DONA Glucosamine, even if it is not on the list of side effects or is not yet known. After using DONA Glucosamine Storage DONA Glucosamine should be stored below 30°C. Do not store this medicine or any other medicine in the bathroom or near a sink. Do not leave it in the car or on window sills. Heat and dampness can destroy some medicines. Keep the medicine where young children cannot reach it. A locked cupboard at least one-and-a-half metres above the ground is a good place to store medicines. Disposal If you no longer need the medicine or it has passed its expiry date, return any unused medicine to your pharmacist. References: https://www.hpra.ie/homepage/site-tools/ https://stratushealthcare.ie/product/dona-1500mg-glucosamine-sulphate-30-sachets/ https://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Dona.aspx https://www.medicines.ie/medicines/dona-1500mg-powder-for-oral-solution-31913/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Osteoarthritis Print This Page Health Reference Osteoarthritis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin