Aspirin, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Aspirin - (Nu-Seals 75mgs) You are here: Home Aspirin - (Nu-Seals 75mgs) Aspirin has a blood thinning action which has been shown to be useful following heart attack and in patients with unstable angina or ischaemic stroke. Nu-Seals 75 is used wherever prolonged dosage of aspirin is required. Nu-Seals 75 is unsuitable for the short-term relief of pain. Why have I been prescribed Aspirin? Aspirin has a blood thinning action which has been shown to be useful following heart attack and in patients with unstable angina or ischaemic stroke . Nu-Seals 75 is used wherever prolonged dosage of aspirin is required. Nu-Seals 75 is unsuitable for the short-term relief of pain. When taken regularly Nu-Seals 75mg can reduce the risk of blood clots forming and can prevent further heart attacks or strokes . How does it work? Platelets are the part of the blood which clump together to form a scab when you cut yourself. They can also clump together in the arteries and form clots which can block the flow of blood and oxygen. This may cause heart attack, angina or stroke . Aspirin stops this happening making the blood thinner and flow easier. When and how do I take it? Always take Nu-Seals 75mg exactly as your doctor has told you. You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. For your first dose, your doctor may ask you to take two 75mg tablets, and chew them so that the aspirin works quickly. If you take these tablets over a long period of time, your doctor may want to review your dose regularly, particularly if you are elderly. Swallow the tablet whole with water. Do not cut, crush or chew it. What’s the dose? 75mg a day-is the standard once daily dose. There is a possible association between aspirin and Reye's syndrome when given to children. Reye's syndrome is a very rare disease which affects both the brain and the liver and can be fatal. For this reason it should not normally be given to children and adolescents aged under 16 years except on medical advice. Could they interact with other tablets? The effect of treatment may be influenced if aspirin is taken at the same time as some other medicines for: Thinning of the blood/prevention of clots (e.g. warfarin ), Organ rejection after transplantation (e.g. cyclosporin, tacrolimus), High blood pressure (e.g. diuretics and ACE-inhibitors), Pain and inflammation (e.g. anti-inflammatory medicines such as ibuprofen, or steroids), Gout (e.g. probnecid), Cancer or rheumatoid arthritis (e.g. methotrexate), antiplatelet agents (e.g. clopidogrel and dipyridamole), diuretics (water tablets), cardiac glycosides (drugs which regulate the heart beat), lithium, corticosteroids, aminoglycosides (a group of antibiotics ), phenytoin , sodium valproate , sulphonamides, selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for depression such as sertraline or paroxetine. Before using aspirin you should inform a healthcare professional about the medicines you are taking. If you are using aspirin regularly you should seek advice before taking any other medicine including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Nu-Seals 75mg can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. The special coating on Nu-Seals 75mg is intended to stop the aspirin from irritating the stomach. You will probably notice you bleed a lot easier and for longer, if for example you cut yourself shaving, or cut your hand with a knife. This is normal. However you must look out for any unexplained bleeding eg blood in urine or stools or persistent nose bleeds. Alert your doctor if notice any bleeding like this you are worried about. The more common side-effects include: hypersensitivity (which may mean you have skin rashes or itching, or wheezing, coughing or difficulty breathing ); feeling sick or actually being sick; diarrhoea; flatulence; constipation; worsening of colitis, Crohn’s disease or irritation of your colostomy; ringing in your ears; and stomach ulcer which can cause stomach pain or discomfort in your stomach or lower chest after eating. Aspirin may sometimes cause asthma or bronchospasm (wheezing or difficulty in breathing). Can I drink alcohol while taking it? It's normally safe to drink alcohol when taking ibuprofen or aspirin as long as you drink within the recommended daily amount (between 3-4 units a day for men and between 2-3 units a day for women). Always ask your doctor or pharmacist first because this may depend on what other rablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Analgesic doses of aspirin should be avoided during the last trimester of pregnancy. As aspirin is secreted into breast milk, Nu-Seals should not be taken by patients who are breast-feeding, as there is a risk of Reye's syndrome in the infant. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: 1. Medicines.ie Website - Aspirin SPC http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/6796/SPC/NAspirin+Tablets/ 2. Medicines.ie Website- Aspirin PIL Read More &gt; Health Reference : Stroke , Heart attack , Heart disease Print This Page More Videos... What is a stroke? What is Angina Oral Hygiene Health Reference Stroke Heart attack Heart disease Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin