Airomir Inhaler, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Airomir You are here: Home Airomir Airomir inhaler contains the active ingredient salbutamol, which is a type of medicine known as a short-acting beta 2 agonist. Salbutamol is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. What is Salbutamol? Salbutamol is called a bronchodilator medicine because it dilates (widens) your airways. It works by opening up the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely. This helps to relieve symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as coughing, wheezing and feeling breathless. It starts to work within a few minutes and the effect will last between 3-5 hours. Salbutamol inhalers are referred to as 'reliever' inhalers or 'blue' inhalers. This is because they relieve symptoms of breathlessness, and the inhalers are usually blue in colour. Although they relieve breathlessness, they do not prevent the breathlessness from happening. Before using a salbutamol inhaler Some medicines are not suitable for people with certain conditions, and sometimes a medicine may only be used if extra care is taken. For these reasons, before you start using a salbutamol inhaler it is important that your doctor knows: If you are pregnant, trying for a baby or breast-feeding. This is because it is particularly important that your breathing is well controlled if you are pregnant. If you have an overactive thyroid gland. If you have heart or blood vessel problems, or if you have an irregular heartbeat. If you have high blood pressure. If you have diabetes (high sugar levels in your blood). If you are taking any other medicines. This includes any medicines you are taking which are available to buy without a prescription, such as herbal and complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to a medicine. How to use a salbutamol inhaler Before using your inhaler, read the manufacturer's printed information leaflet from inside the pack. The leaflet will give you more information about salbutamol, diagrams to remind you how to use and clean your inhaler device, and a full list of side-effects which you may experience from using it. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and make sure you know how to use your inhaler properly. There are several types of inhaler device. Some of these devices create a spray which you inhale, others are activated when you breathe in. If you are not sure how to use the device you have been given, ask your nurse, doctor or pharmacist to show you. You will receive a written asthma action plan from your asthma nurse or doctor which will tell you how many inhalations (puffs) to use for each dose, and the maximum number of inhalations you should use in 24 hours. If you do not get relief from your symptoms after using the salbutamol inhaler, you must contact your doctor for advice straightaway. Your doctor may give you a spacer device to use with the salbutamol inhaler particularly if you struggle to co-ordinate breathing in and pressing the inhaler device. Spacer devices are also useful for giving salbutamol to young children. The device helps to make sure that the medicine travels right into the lungs. Your doctor or pharmacist will be able to advise you on how to use the spacer device with the inhaler. Can salbutamol inhalers cause problems? Along with their useful effects, most medicines can cause unwanted side-effects although not everyone experiences them. The table below contains some of the most common ones associated with salbutamol. You will find a full list in the manufacturer's information leaflet supplied with your inhaler. The unwanted effects often improve as your body adjusts to the new medicine, but speak with your doctor or pharmacist if any of the following continue or become troublesome. Feeling shaky Headache Nervous tension, muscle cramps, being aware of your heartbeat How to store salbutamol inhalers Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. Getting the most from your treatment Try to keep your regular appointments with your doctor and asthma clinic. This is so your doctor can review your condition on a regular basis. Make sure that you keep your salbutamol inhaler with you all the time in case you need to use it. It should provide you with several hours' relief. If at any time you feel it is not working, you should let your asthma nurse/doctor know straightaway. If you are using other inhalers at the same time, use the salbutamol inhaler first and then wait for a few minutes before using the other inhalers. Salbutamol opens your air passages to allow the other inhalers to work more effectively. Carefully read your asthma action plan from your nurse or doctor. It will tell you how to manage your asthma and it will also say what to do if you have an asthma attack. If at any time your breathing gets worse, continue to use your inhalers but also contact your doctor or nurse for advice straightaway. Also, if you are needing to use the maximum number of salbutamol puffs every day (or if you continue to have symptoms despite using the maximum amount), you must let your doctor know about this too, as you may require additional treatment. Do not smoke. Smoking causes irritation and damage to the lungs, and will make your condition worse. Speak with your doctor or practice nurse for further advice if you are having difficulty in stopping smoking. What happens if I miss a dose? Use the missed dose as soon as you remember. Skip the missed dose if it is almost time for your next scheduled dose. Do not use extra medicine to make up the missed dose. What other drugs will affect Ventolin? Tell your doctor about all other medicines you use, especially: a diuretic (water pill); digoxin (digitalis, Lanoxin); a beta-blocker such as atenolol (Tenormin, Tenoretic), carvedilol (Coreg), labetalol (Normodyne, Trandate), metoprolol (Dutoprol, Lopressor, Toprol), nadolol (Corgard), nebivolol (Bystolic), propranolol (Inderal, InnoPran), sotalol (Betapace), and others; an antidepressant such as amitriptyline (Elavil, Vanatrip, Limbitrol), doxepin (Sinequan, Silenor), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and others; an MAO inhibitor such as furazolidone (Furoxone), isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), rasagiline (Azilect), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), or tranylcypromine (Parnate); or other bronchodilators such as levalbuterol (Xopenex), pirbuterol (Maxair), terbutaline (Brethine, Bricanyl), salmeterol (Advair, Serevent), metaproterenol (Alupent, Metaprel), or isoproterenol (Isuprel Mistometer). This list is not complete and other drugs may interact with Ventolin. Tell your doctor about all medications you use. This includes prescription, over-the-counter, vitamin, and herbal products. Do not start a new medication without telling your doctor. References: http://patient.info/medicine/salbutamol-inhaler http://www.drugs.com/ventolin.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ventolin http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/6438/SPC/Ventolin+Evohaler/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emcmobile/PIL.3860.latest.pdf http://www.ventolin.com http://www.medbroadcast.com/Drug/GetDrug/Ventolin http://www.rxlist.com/ventolin-hfa-side-effects-drug-center.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Asthma , Childhood Asthma , Exercise induced asthma Print This Page Health Reference Asthma Childhood Asthma Exercise induced asthma Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin