Duac Gel, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Duac Once Daily Cream You are here: Home Duac Once Daily Cream Duac once daily gel is a prescription-only acne treatment containing benzoyl peroxide and an antibiotic called clindamycin. What is Duac gel used for? Mild to moderate acne. How does Duac gel work? Duac once daily gel contains two active ingredients, clindamycin phosphate and benzoyl peroxide, both of which are medicines used to treat acne. Clindamycin is an antibiotic that is used to treat infections with bacteria. Clindamycin is active against a wide variety of bacteria, including the bacteria associated with acne, Propionebacterium acnes. This is a common type of bacteria that feeds on sebum produced by the sebaceous glands in the skin. It produces waste products and fatty acids that irritate the sebaceous glands, making them inflamed and causing spots. By controlling bacterial numbers, clindamycin brings the inflammation of the sebaceous glands under control, and allows the skin to heal. Benzoyl peroxide is a type of medicine known as a keratolytic. This means that it works by breaking down keratin, a protein which forms part of the skin structure. When you apply benzoyl peroxide to the skin it causes the top layer of skin cells to break down and shed. This helps break down comedones (blackheads and whiteheads) and unblocks the sebaceous glands. It also helps to prevent the formation of new comedones. Benzoyl peroxide also has an antibacterial action and directly kills the Propionebacterium acnes bacteria on the skin. These two medicines are combined in this gel to have a complementary effect on acne. Benzoyl peroxide starts to reduce the oiliness of the skin immediately, but it may take two to six weeks of treatment before the full effect of both medicines on the acne is seen. How do I use Duac gel? Wash the skin with a mild cleanser and pat it dry before applying the gel. Duac once daily gel should be applied thinly to the whole affected areas of skin (not just the individual spots) once a day in the evening. If the gel doesn't rub in easily you are applying too much. Wash your hands after applying the gel. If you experience excessive redness, dryness or peeling of your skin after using this gel, decrease the amount of gel you use and use it less frequently (or stop temporarily). If any soreness persists consult your doctor. Do not use this product excessively - this won't make it any more effective but will increase the chance of it irritating your skin. This medicine should not be used for longer than 12 weeks at a time. Duac gel should be used with caution by People with sensitive skin. People with a history of inflammation of part of the intestines (enteritis). People with a history of inflammation of the bowel and back passage (ulcerative colitis). People with a history of inflammation of the large intestine due to antibiotic treatment (antibiotic-associated colitis). Duac gel should not&nbsp; be used by People who are allergic to benzoyl peroxide, clindamycin or the related antibiotic lincomycin. This medicine is not recommended for children under the age of 12 years. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. The safety of this medicine in pregnancy has not been fully established, although it is not expected to be harmful. It should be used with caution during pregnancy, and only if the benefits to the mother outweigh any potential risks to the developing baby. Seek further medical advice from your doctor. It is not known if this medicine passes into breast milk after application to the skin. Clindamycin does pass into breast milk when taken by mouth. For this reason this medicine should be used with caution during breastfeeding and only if the benefits to the mother outweigh any possible risk to the nursing infant. If you do use this medicine while breastfeeding make sure you do not apply it to areas where it could be ingested by the baby or transferred to the baby's skin while you are feeding. Stop using the medicine and consult your doctor if the child develops diarrhoea while you are using this medicine. Possibel side effects of Duac gel Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Very common (affect more than 1 in 10 people) Redness, dryness and peeling of the skin at the application site (usually mild). Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Burning sensation at the application site. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Pins and needles or tingling sensation at the application site. Rash, itching or inflammation of the skin at the application site. Worsening of acne. Unknown frequency Discolouration of the skin at application site. Allergic reactions. Inflammation of the intestine and diarrhoea, including bloody diarrhoea and stomach pain. Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more&nbsp;information about the possible side effects of this medicine. Can I use Duac gel with other medicines? It is important to tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already taking, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start using this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. This medicine should not be used in combination with products that contain the antibiotic erythromycin. Skin preparations such as medicated cosmetics, soaps, cleansers, toiletries and other anti-acne preparations, particularly those containing high concentrations of alcohol or astringents, should be used with caution in combination with this medicine, as they are likely to have an additive drying or irritant effect on the skin. Products containing tretinoin, isotretinoin or tazarotene should not be used at the same time as this medicine, since benzoyl peroxide may reduce their effectiveness and increase irritation. If combination treatment is required, the products should be applied at different times of the day (eg one in the morning and the other in the evening). References: http://www.rxlist.com/duac-side-effects-drug-center.htm https://www.drugs.com/cdi/duac-gel.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a8520/duac-once-daily-gel-benzoyl-peroxide-clindamycin/ http://acnetreatmentsireland.org/duac-once-daily-gel-for-acne/ &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Acne Print This Page More Videos... Duac Acne Health Reference Acne Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin