Chilblains | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Chilblains You are here: Home Chilblains Chilblains is a painful inflammation of small blood vessels in your skin responding to sudden warming from cold temperatures. Also known as pernio, chilblains can cause itching, red patches, swelling and blistering on extremities, such as on your toes, fingers, ears and nose. What is it? Chilblains is a painful inflammation of small blood vessels in your skin responding to sudden warming from cold temperatures. Also known as pernio, chilblains can cause itching, red patches, swelling and blistering on extremities, such as on your toes, fingers, ears and nose. Chilblains usually responds well to treatment and clears up within 14 days. Treatments typically consist of lotions and medication. While it doesn't usually result in permanent injury, chilblains can lead to severe damage if left untreated. The best approach to chilblains is to avoid developing it by limiting your exposure to cold, dressing warmly and covering exposed skin. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of chilblains usually include: Small, itchy red areas on your skin Possible blistering Inflammation of your skin Burning sensation on your skin Swelling Changes in skin color from red to dark blue, accompanied by pain Possible ulceration Causes Chilblains is usually the result of an abnormal reaction of your body to cold. It tends to develop on skin that's exposed to cold and is then warmed too quickly, such as by warming your hands directly in front of a heater or fire. This cooling and rapid heating can cause small blood vessels under your skin to expand more quickly than nearby larger blood vessels can handle, resulting in a "bottleneck" effect and the blood leaking into nearby tissues. Exactly why this occurs in certain people is unknown. Risk factors Because chilblains is a reaction to cold, any exposure of skin to cold weather may be risky. Ironically, chilblains is less likely in colder and drier countries because the living conditions and clothing used in these climates are more protective against cold. Chilblains may result from or be aggravated by unusual pressure on your skin, such as tight shoes or a bunion on your foot. People with poor circulation or who are overly sensitive to changes in temperature are more susceptible to chilblains. Women are more likely to get chilblains, though why is not known. Complications Chilblains may cause complications if your skin blisters. If that happens, you may develop ulcers and infections. Besides being painful, infections are potentially life-threatening if left untreated. See a doctor if you suspect infection. Treatments and drugs Treatment options for chilblains include: Corticosteroid creams. Topical corticosteroids can help relieve itching and swelling. Blood pressure medication. A blood pressure lowering drug called nifedipine (Adalat) is sometimes used to treat the cause of chilblains, since it can help open up blood vessels. Infection prevention. If your skin has broken, treatment also includes cleaning and protecting your wounds to prevent infection. Lifestyle remedies Chilblains usually clear up after one to three weeks. In the meantime, you can take steps to ease your symptoms, including: Keeping your affected skin warm, but away from sources of heat Using lotions to alleviate itching and swelling Making sure the affected skin is cleaned with an antiseptic to prevent infection Avoiding scratching Alternative medicine Vitamin D has sometimes been used to treat chilblains, but recent research suggests that this therapy doesn't work. Prevention To prevent chilblains, avoid or limit your exposure to cold. Follow this advice: Dress in warm layers of clothing. Cover all exposed skin when going outside in cold weather. Make sure you keep your hands, feet and face warm. Keep your home and workplace comfortably warm. If your skin is exposed to cold, it's helpful to rewarm it gradually, since sudden rewarming of cold skin may worsen chilblains. References: http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/chilblains/Pages/Introduction.aspx https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chilblains http://patient.info/health/chilblains http://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/C/Chilblains/ http://www.dermnetnz.org/reactions/chilblains.html &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Adalat Antibiotics Hydrocortisyl Cream Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin