Daktarin Cream, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Daktarin Cream You are here: Home Daktarin Cream Daktarin cream contains the active ingredient miconazole. Miconazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. What is Daktarin cream used for? Fungal infections of the skin, eg ringworm, candidiasis, athlete's foot, scalp infections, fungal nappy rash, groin infections. Fungal infections of the nails. The cream can be used to treat adults and children of all ages. How does Daktarin cream work? Daktarin cream contains the active ingredient miconazole. Miconazole kills fungi and yeasts by interfering with their cell membranes. It works by stopping the fungi from producing a substance called ergosterol, which is an essential component of fungal cell membranes. The disruption in production of ergosterol disrupts the fungal cell membrane, causing holes to appear in it. The cell membranes of fungi are vital for their survival. They keep unwanted substances from entering the cells and stop the contents of the cells from leaking out. As miconazole causes holes to appear in the cell membranes, essential constituents of the fungal cells can leak out. This kills the fungi and treats the infection. Miconazole also has some antibacterial action and kills certain bacteria that may also be present in the infection. How do I use Daktarin cream? Wash and dry the affected area(s) of skin or nails thoroughly before applying the cream. For skin infections, the cream should be applied to the affected area(s) of skin twice a day (morning and evening). Rub the cream gently into the affected area and surrounding skin. For nail infections, the cream should be applied to the affected nail(s) once or twice a day. Rub it in gently to the nail and surrounding skin. Unless the infected skin is on your hands, wash your hands after applying the cream to avoid spreading the infection to other areas of the body, or to other people. It can take two to six weeks of treatment with this cream to clear up the infection, depending on how widespread and how severe the infection is. Nail infections typically take longer to clear up than skin infections. You should continue to use the cream for 10 days after all signs of the infection have cleared up. This is to make sure that the infection is fully treated and thus prevent it coming back. If the infection doesn't seem to be getting better or gets worse you should consult your doctor. Important information about Daktarin cream This cream is for external use only. It should not be taken by mouth or used inside the mouth or nose. Take care to avoid getting the cream in the eyes. If you get a severe skin reaction to the cream you should stop using it and consult your doctor. Daktarin cream should not be used in Allergy to any ingredient. This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy. If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction, stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine should be used with caution during pregnancy, and only if the expected benefit to the mother is greater than any possible risk to the developing baby. Miconazole is unlikely to be absorbed through the skin in sufficient amounts to affect the baby. However, as with all medicines, you should seek medical advice from your doctor before using this medicine if you are pregnant. Miconazole is unlikely to be absorbed through the skin in significant amounts, however, it is not known if the medicine passes into breast milk. It should be used with caution by breastfeeding mothers, and only if the expected benefit to the mother is greater than any possible risk to the baby. As with all medicines, you should seek medical advice from your doctor before using this medicine if you are breastfeeding. If you do use the cream while breastfeeding, you should not apply it to the skin of the breasts shortly before giving a feed, to avoid it being ingested by the nursing infant. Possible side effects of Daktarin cream Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Uncommon&nbsp; Skin irritation (eg burning sensation, redness, warmth, itching) at the application site. Very rare&nbsp; Allergic reactions at the application site, for example hives or allergic rash (contact dermatitis). If affected stop using this medicine and consult your doctor. Allergic reactions such as swelling of the face, tongue and throat or anaphylaxis. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. If you think you have experienced a side effect from a medicine or vaccine you should check the patient information leaflet. This lists the known side effects and what to do if you get them. You can also get advice from your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. If they think it's necessary they'll report it for you. Can I use Daktarin cream with other medicines? Tell your doctor or pharmacist what medicines you are already using, including those bought without a prescription and herbal medicines, before you start treatment with this medicine. Similarly, check with your doctor or pharmacist before using any new medicines while using this one, to make sure that the combination is safe. Miconazole is unlikely to be absorbed through the skin in sufficient amounts to significantly affect other medicines that you are taking by mouth. However, if you are taking warfarin to prevent blood clots, there is a very small chance that miconazole absorbed from this cream may enhance the effect of the warfarin. If you are taking warfarin your doctor may therefore want to monitor your blood-clotting time (INR) during and after a course of this medicine. If you are using other topical medicines or moisturisers on the same area of skin it is recommended that you leave about 30 minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing or diluting on the skin. References: https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2166546.PA0823_059_001.e7f468f0-d44d-4c6f-8bc5-9273dffadc86.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved%20Cream.151029.pdf http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/1952/SPC/Daktarin+2++w+w+Cream/ http://www.news-medical.net/drugs/Daktarin-Cream.aspx http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a7920/daktarin-cream-miconazole/ &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Nappy Rash Print This Page Health Reference Nappy Rash Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin