Casodex, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Casodex (bicalutamide) Tablets You are here: Home Casodex (bicalutamide) Tablets Casodex contains a medicine called bicalutamide. This belongs to a group of medicines called ‘anti-androgens’. Casodex is used to treat prostate cancer. Why have I been prescribed Casodex? Casodex contains a medicine called bicalutamide. This belongs to a group of medicines&nbsp;called ‘anti-androgens’. Casodex is used to treat prostate cancer . How does it work? It works by blocking the effects of male hormones such as testosterone. When and how do I take it? Always take Casodex exactly as your doctor has told you. You should check with your&nbsp;doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. The usual dose for an adult is one tablet each day. Swallow the tablet whole with a drink of water. Try to take your tablet at the same time each day. Do not stop taking this medicine even if you feel well, unless your doctor tells you to. What’s the dose? The usual dose for an adult is one tablet each day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other&nbsp;medicines. This includes medicines that you buy without a prescription and herbal medicines. Do not take Casodex if you are already taking any of the following medicines: Cisapride (used for some types of indigestion). Certain anti-histamine medicines (terfenadine or astemizole). Also, tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following medicines: Medicines taken by mouth to prevent blood clots (oral anti-coagulants). Ciclosporin (to suppress your immune system). Calcium channel blockers (to treat high blood pressure or some heart conditions). Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Casodex can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Allergic reactions: These are uncommon (affect less than 1 in 100 people). The symptoms can include&nbsp;sudden onset of: Rash, itching or hives on the skin. Swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat or other parts of the body. Shortness of breath, wheezing or trouble breathing. If this happens to you, see a doctor straight away.&nbsp;Also tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following: Very common (affects more than 1 in 10 people): Pain in your abdomen. Blood in your urine. Common (affects less than 1 in 10 people): Yellowing of the skin or whites of your eyes (jaundice). These may be signs of liver&nbsp;problems or in rare cases (affects less than 1 in 1,000 people) liver failure. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Casodex. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Casodex cannot be taken by women. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bicalutamide http://www.drugs.com/casodex.html http://www.rxlist.com/casodex-drug.htm http://chemocare.com/chemotherapy/drug-info/casodex.aspx http://www1.astrazeneca-us.com/pi/casodex.pdf http://www.macmillan.org.uk/Cancerinformation/Cancertreatment/Treatmenttypes/Hormonaltherapies/Individualhormonaltherapies/Bicalutamide.aspx &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Prostate Cancer , Cancer Print This Page Health Reference Prostate Cancer Cancer Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin