Drynol, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Drynol Tablets You are here: Home Drynol Tablets DRYNOL tablets contain bilastine which is a antihistamine. DRYNOL 20 mg tablets are used to relieve the symptoms of hayfever (sneezing, itchy, runny, blocked-up nose and red and watery eyes) and other forms of allergic rhinitis. They may also be used to treat itchy skin rashes (hives or urticaria). Whats the dose Adults, including the elderly and adolescents aged 12 years and over: Take one tablet daily. The tablet must be taken on an empty stomach, for example in the morning prior to breakfast. You must not eat&nbsp;for 1 hour after taking bilastine. Swallow your tablet with a glass of water. The score line is not intended to divide the tablet into equal doses. It can be used to break the tablet and make&nbsp;swallowing easier. Regarding the duration of treatment, your physician will determine the type of disease you are suffering from and will determine for how long you should take DRYNOL. What are the side effects Common: affects 1 to 10 users in 100 headache drowsiness uncommon: affects 1 to 10 users in 1,000 abnormal ECG heart tracing blood tests which show changes in the way the liver is working • dizziness stomach pain tiredness increased appetite irregular heartbeat increased weight nausea (the feeling of being sick) anxiety dry or uncomfortable nose belly pain diarrhoea gastritis (inflammation of the stomach wall) vertigo (a feeling of dizziness or spinning) feeling of weakness thirst dyspnoea (difficulty in breathing ) dry mouth indigestion itching cold sores (oral herpes) fever tinnitus (ringing in the ears) difficulty in sleeping blood tests which show changes in the way kidney is working If any of the side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed, please tell your doctor or pharmacist. How to store Drynol Keep out of the reach and sight of children. Do not use DRYNOL after the expiry date which is stated on the carton and the blisters after EXP. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions. Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of medicines no longer required. These measures will help to protect the environment. References: http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/15036/SPC/Drynol+20+mg+tablets/ https://www.drugs.com/international/drynol.html https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2125880.PA0865_018_001.2aeea800-1119-4833-b1bc-da50fba672a7.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved.130402.pdf &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hay fever Print This Page More Videos... Drynol Health Reference Hay fever Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin