Biological Therapy | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Biological Therapy You are here: Home Biological Therapy Biological therapy (also called biological response modifier, or BRM; and immunotherapy) uses the body's own immune system to destroy cancer cells. Biological therapy is still experimental, but shows great promise. There are several different types of biological therapy for cancer: Immunostimulant therapy Immunoglobulin therapy Monoclonal antibodies Immunostimulant therapy uses two different procedures: One uses substances called immunostimulants, which activate the immune system. Another procedure involves inoculating the patient with tumorcells or cellular extracts taken from someone else with the same disease. The substances are rendered harmless by irradiation and introduced into the patient, causing the patient's own immune system to react against them and produce antibodies that attack the tumor cells. Immunoglobulin therapy uses already-made antibodies called immunoglobulins from another person with the same type of tumor. These are given directly to the patient. The immunoglobulins then act against the cancer cells. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a recent development in immunotherapy. It involves the use of genetically engineered substances called monoclonal antibodies that are produced in a laboratory. Monoclonal antibodies are designed to neutralize specific targets (antigens) and are linked with specific cancer-killing substances like Interferon to increase their ability to target and destroy tumor cells. Side Effects Of Biological Therapy Side effects of biological therapy vary depending on the type of treatment, but can include the following: Weakness Nausea Vomiting Diarrhoea Chills Fever Flu-like symptoms Bruising At times these symptoms may become severe enough that a hospital stay is necessary for part or all of the treatment. A risk with immunotherapy is that the treatments may be recognized as foreign by the person's immune system. When this happens, allergic reactions can occur, as well as new antibody production, which interferes with the targeting of the cancer. References: http://www.oncolink.org/treatment/article.cfm?c=16&amp;id=335 http://www.cancer.ie/cancer-information/treatments/biological-therapies#sthash.e7nRpUQ2.dpbs http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancers-in-general/treatment/biological/ http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancers-in-general/treatment/biological/about-biological-therapy http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/types/immunotherapy/bio-therapies-fact-sheet &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin