Headache (chronic daily) | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Headache (chronic daily) You are here: Home Headache (chronic daily) Most people have headaches from time to time. But if you have a headache more days than not, you may be experiencing a variety of head pain known as chronic daily headaches. What is it? Most people have headaches from time to time. But if you have a headache more days than not, you may be experiencing a variety of head pain known as chronic daily headaches. The incessant nature of chronic daily headaches makes them among the most disabling headaches. Aggressive initial treatment and steady, long-term management may reduce pain and lead to fewer chronic daily headaches. Symptoms By definition, chronic daily headaches must occur 15 days or more a month, for at least three months. And to be considered true (primary) chronic daily headaches, they must also not be the result of another condition. Chronic daily headaches are classified by how long they last — more than four hours or less than four hours. The longer lasting headaches are more common and addressed here. They're divided into four types: Chronic migraine Chronic tension-type headache New daily persistent headache Hemicrania continua Chronic migraine These headaches evolve from episodic migraine without aura. To be diagnosed with chronic migraine, you must have headaches — migraine, tension-type or both — 15 days or more a month, for at least three months. In addition, on eight or more days a month for at least three months, you must experience the following symptoms. Your headaches have at least two of the following characteristics: Affect only one side of your head Cause a pulsating pain Cause moderate to severe pain Are aggravated by routine physical activity And they cause at least one of the following: Nausea, vomiting or both Sensitivity to light and sound Alternatively, if your headaches respond to triptan medications or ergot medications taken in anticipation of these symptoms — on eight or more days a month for at least three months — they're also considered chronic migraines. Chronic tension-type headache These headaches evolve from episodic tension-type headaches. They may last hours or be constant. Chronic tension-type headaches have at least two of the following characteristics: Hurt on both sides of your head Cause mild to moderate pain Cause pain that feels pressing or tightening, but not pulsating Aren't aggravated by routine physical activity In addition, they cause no more than one of the following: Sensitivity to light or sound Nausea (mild only) New daily persistent headache These headaches become constant within a few days of the moment you have your first headache. New daily persistent headaches have at least two of the following characteristics: Hurt on both sides of your head Cause pain that feels like pressing or tightening, but not pulsating Cause mild to moderate pain Aren't aggravated by routine physical activity In addition, they cause no more than one of the following: Sensitivity to light or sound Nausea (mild only) Hemicrania continua These headaches cause pain on only one side of your head that doesn't shift sides. They also: Are daily and continuous with no pain-free periods Cause moderate pain but with spikes of severe pain Respond to the prescription pain reliever indomethacin (Indocin) May sometimes become severe with development of migraine- like symptoms In addition, hemicrania continua headaches cause at least one of the following: Tearing or redness of the eye on the affected side Nasal congestion or runny nose Drooping of the eyelid or constriction of the pupil Causes The causes of many chronic daily headaches aren't well understood. True (primary) chronic daily headaches don't have an identifiable underlying cause. They may occur if: You develop a heightened response to pain signals The part of your brain that suppresses pain signals isn't working properly Other frequent headaches may be caused by various underlying diseases or conditions, including: Inflammation or other problems with the blood vessels in and around the brain, including stroke Infections, such as meningitis Intracranial pressure that's either too high or too low Brain tumor Traumatic brain injury Many people who have frequent headaches are actually experiencing a rebound effect from taking pain medication too often. If you're taking pain medications — even over-the-counter analgesics — more than three days a week, you're at risk of developing rebound headaches. Risk factors Various factors may increase the risk of developing frequent headaches, including: Anxiety Depression Sleep disturbances Obesity Snoring Overuse of caffeine Overuse of pain medication Regular use of physical postures that put a strain on your head or neck Complications If you have chronic daily headaches, you're also more likely to experience depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, and other psychological and physical problems. Diagnosis Your doctor will probably do a physical exam to check for signs of illness, infection or neurological problems. If the cause of your headaches remains uncertain, you may need blood or urine tests to identify any underlying medical conditions. Sometimes imaging studies — such as an X-ray, CT scan or MRI scan — are recommended. References: http://www.americanheadachesociety.org/assets/1/7/NAP_for_Web_-_CDH___Chronic_Migraine.pdf http://patient.info/health/chronic-tension-type-headache http://www.neurology.org/content/76/7_Supplement_2/S37.full https://www.migrainetrust.org/about-migraine/types-of-migraine/chronic-migraine/ http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healthlibrary/conditions/adult/nervous_system_disorders/Chronic_Daily_Headache_22,ChronicDailyHeadache/ http://www.achenet.org/news/chronic_daily_headache/ &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin