Co Amoxiclav, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Co-Amoxiclav Tablets/Suspension You are here: Home Co-Amoxiclav Tablets/Suspension Co-Amoxiclav is a generic brand of Augmentin. Co-Amoxiclav is a medicine which is used in certain types of bacterial infections. Co-Amoxiclav contains amoxicillin trihydrate/potassium clavulanate. What is Co-Amoxiclav&nbsp; Co-Amoxiclav is a&nbsp; penicillin &nbsp;antibiotic&nbsp;that contains two medicines -&nbsp; amoxicillin &nbsp;trihydrate and potassium clavulanate. They work together to kill certain types of bacteria and are used to treat certain types of bacterial infections.&nbsp;Co-Amoxiclav&nbsp;is usually used for up to14 days initially, and then your doctor will review the need for you to have further treatment with Co-Amoxiclav. If your symptoms continue or become worse you should contact your doctor Do not share your medicine with other people. It may not be suitable for them and may harm them. The pharmacy label on your medicine tells you how much medicine you should take. It also tells you how often you should take your medicine. This is the dose that you and your prescriber have agreed you should take. You should not change the dose of your medicine unless you are told to do so by your prescriber. If you feel that the medicine is making you unwell or you do not think it is working, then talk to your prescriber. Is Co-Amoxiclav suitable for you? Co-Amoxiclav is not suitable for everyone and some people should never use it. Other people should only use it with special care. It is important that the person prescribing this medicine knows your full medical history. Your prescriber may only prescribe this medicine with special care or may not prescribe it at all if you: are&nbsp; allergic &nbsp;or sensitive to or have had a bad reaction to&nbsp; penicillins &nbsp;or beta-lactam&nbsp;antibiotics&nbsp;such as cephalosporins ( Keflex) , carbapenems or monobactams in the past are&nbsp;allergic&nbsp;or sensitive to or have had a reaction to any of the ingredients in the medicine are elderly are passing less urine than usual have glandular fever have glucose-galactose malabsorption problems have had atopic&nbsp;allergies have had jaundice in the past after taking Augmentin-Duo have&nbsp; kidney problems have&nbsp; liver problems have phenylketonuria Furthermore the prescriber may only prescribe this medicine with special care or may not prescribe it at all for someone who is under the age of two months. Side effects of Co-Amoxiclav: Check with your doctor as soon as possible if you think you are experiencing any side-effects or allergic reactions due to taking Co-Amoxiclav tablets, even if the problem is not listed below. Like other medicines, Co-Amoxiclav can cause some side-effects. If they occur, they are most likely to be minor and temporary. However, some may be serious and need medical attention.&nbsp;Tell your doctor about any effect which is troublesome or ongoing. Mild side effects Tell your doctor if you notice any of the following that are troublesome or ongoing: diarrhoea&nbsp; (several loose bowel movements per day), indigestion, pain in the stomach, feeling sick or being sick white, furry, sore tongue and mouth (oral thrush), abnormal taste soreness or&nbsp; itching&nbsp; of the vagina or vaginal discharge (vaginal thrush) headache ,&nbsp; dizziness, &nbsp; tiredness, &nbsp; hot flushes tooth discolouration unusually active (hyperactivity) More serious side effects Tell your doctor immediately if you notice any of the following during or after taking&nbsp;Co-Amoxiclav&nbsp;tablets: itching , rash dark urine or pale stools yellowing of the skin or eyes ( jaundice ) severe stomach cramps severe watery or bloody&nbsp; diarrhoea unusual bleeding or bruising These may be symptoms of rare but serious side-effects and require urgent medical attention. Stop taking Co-Amoxiclav tablets and immediately contact your doctor or go to the emergency department of your nearest hospital if any of the following happens: Wheezing,&nbsp; hives , severe skin reaction, fainting, swelling of limbs, face, lips, mouth or throat, difficulty swallowing or breathing, joint discomfort or swelling, swollen lymph glands, nausea and vomiting or fever .&nbsp;These may be signs of an allergic reaction or other reaction to Germentin.&nbsp;Allergy&nbsp;to these&nbsp;antibiotics&nbsp;is rare. Fits/seizures. Alcohol Alcohol can interact with certain medicines. In the case of Co-Amoxiclav: there are no known interactions between alcohol and Co-Amoxiclav Driving and operating machinery When taking any medicine you should be aware that it might interfere with your ability to drive or operate machinery safely. In the case of Co-Amoxiclav: this medicine could affect your ability to drive or operate machinery You should see how this medicine affects you before you judge whether you are safe to drive or operate machinery. If you are in any doubt about whether you should drive or operate machinery, talk to your prescriber. Breast-feeding Certain medicines can pass into breast milk and may reach your baby through breast-feeding. In the case of Co-Amoxiclav: you should only take this medicine while breast-feeding if your doctor thinks you need it Before you have your baby you should discuss breast-feeding with your doctor or midwife. They will help you decide what is best for you and your baby based on the benefits and risks associated with this medicine. You should only breast-feed your baby while taking this medicine on the advice of your doctor or midwife. Interactions If you are taking more than one medicine they may interact with each other. At times your prescriber may decide to use medicines that interact, in other cases this may not be appropriate. The decision to use medicines that interact depends on your specific circumstances. Your prescriber may decide to use medicines that interact, if it is believed that the benefits of taking the medicines together outweigh the risks. In such cases, it may be necessary to alter your dose or monitor you more closely. Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or&nbsp;pharmacist.&nbsp;You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Co-Amoxiclav: acenocoumarol allopurinol methotrexate probenecid warfarin The following types of medicine may interact with Co-Amoxiclav: anticoagulants medicines that are damaging to the liver If you are taking Co-Amoxiclav and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. How do I store Co-Amoxiclav: Keep your tablets in the original pack until it is time to take them. If you take the tablets out of the pack, they may not keep well. Keep the pack in a cool dry place. Do not leave it in the car on a hot day. Do not store medicine in the bathroom or near a sink. Heat and dampness can destroy Co-Amoxiclav tablets. Store all medicines out of the reach of children, such as in a locked cupboard. If your doctor tells you to stop taking Co-Amoxiclav&nbsp;tablets or if the expiry date has passed, ask your pharmacist what to do with any tablets that are left over. If you have any more questions please ask your&nbsp;Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note:&nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Augmentin-Duo http://www.nhs.uk/medicine-guides/pages/MedicineOverview.aspx?condition=Bacterial%20infections&amp;medicine=Augmentin http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/5417/SPC/ http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/5417/SPC/ http://www.mydr.com.au/medicines/cmis/augmentin-duo-forte-tablets http://www.patient.co.uk/leaflets/augmentin_duo.htm http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/2026/spc Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Cough Treatment Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin