Byetta Injection, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Byetta injection You are here: Home Byetta injection BYETTA is an injectable medicine used to improve blood sugar control in adults with type 2 (non insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus. Why have I been prescribed Byetta? BYETTA is an injectable medicine used to improve blood sugar control in adults with type 2 (non insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus . BYETTA is used with other diabetic medicines called metformin and/or sulphonylureas .Your doctor is now prescribing BYETTA as an additional medicine to help control your blood sugar. Continue to follow your food and exercise plan. How does it work? You have diabetes because your body does not make enough insulin to control the level of sugar in your blood or if your body is not able to use the insulin properly. BYETTA contains a drug called Exenatide which helps your body to increase the production of insulin when your blood sugar is high. When and how do I take it? BYETTA should be injected at any time within the 60 minutes (1 hour) before your morning and evening meals, or before your two main meals of the day, which should be about 6 hours or more apart. Do not use BYETTA after your meal. BYETTA is injected under the skin (subcutaneous injection) of your upper leg (thigh), stomach area (abdomen), or upper arm. See the accompanying Pen User Manual for instructions for using the BYETTA Pen. What’s the dose? Two presentations of BYETTA are available: BYETTA 5 micrograms(μg) and BYETTA 10 micrograms(μg). Your doctor may tell you to use BYETTA 5 μg twice a day to start with. After using BYETTA 5 μg twice a day for 30 days the doctor may increase your dose to BYETTA 10 μg twice a day. One injection of your pre-filled pen will give you your dose. Do not change your dose unless your doctor has told you to. Could it interact with other tablets? BYETTA slows stomach emptying and can affect medicines that need to pass through the stomach quickly. Ask your doctor if the time at which you take any tablets (for example, antibiotics) should be changed. For tablets that you need to take with food, it may be best if they are taken at a meal at a time when BYETTA is not being administered. Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, BYETTA can have side effects although not everybody gets them. Very common, more than 1 in 10 patients experienced: nausea, (nausea is most common when first starting BYETTA, but decreases over time in most patients), vomiting or diarrhoea. When BYETTA is used with a medicine that contains a sulphonylurea, episodes of low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia, generally mild to moderate) can occur very commonly. The dose of your sulphonylurea medicine may need to be reduced while you use BYETTA. The signs and symptoms of low blood sugar may include headache, drowsiness, weakness, dizziness, confusion, irritability, hunger, fast heartbeat, sweating, and feeling jittery. Your doctor should tell you how to treat low blood sugar. Common, less than 1 in 10 but more than 1 in 100 patients experienced: dizziness headache reduced appetite weight decreased feeling jittery pain in the stomach area bloating indigestion increased sweating loss of energy and strength heartburn injection site reactions (redness) In addition some other side effects have been reported: angiodema hypersensitivity (rashes, itching and rapid swelling of the tissues of the neck, face, mouth or throat) decrease in kidney function dehydration, sometimes with a decrease in kidney function unusual taste in the mouth drowsiness constipation burping flatulence hair loss (rarely) Changes in INR (measurement of blood thinning) have been reported when used together with warfarin. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Byetta. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? It is not known if BYETTA may harm your unborn child. Tell your doctor if you are, you think you might be, or are planning to become pregnant as BYETTA should not be used during pregnancy. It is not known if BYETTA passes into your milk. BYETTA should not be used if breast-feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.byettahcp.com/ http://www.byetta.com/ http://www.drugs.com/byetta.html http://www.medicinenet.com/exenatide/article.htm http://www.drugwatch.com/byetta/ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exenatide &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Diabetes - Type 2 Print This Page Health Reference Diabetes - Type 2 Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin