Appendicitis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Appendicitis You are here: Home Appendicitis Appendicitis is a condition in which your appendix becomes inflamed and fills with pus. Your appendix is a finger-shaped pouch that projects out from your colon on the lower right side of your abdomen. What is it? Appendicitis is a condition in which your appendix becomes inflamed and fills with pus. Your appendix is a finger-shaped pouch that projects out from your colon on the lower right side of your abdomen. This small structure has no known essential purpose, but that doesn't mean it can't cause problems. Appendicitis causes pain that typically begins around your navel and then shifts to your lower right abdomen. Appendicitis pain typically increases over a period of 12 to 18 hours and eventually becomes very severe. Appendicitis can affect anyone, but it most often occurs in people between the ages of 10 and 30. The standard appendicitis treatment is surgical removal of the appendix. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of appendicitis may include : Aching pain that begins around your navel and often shifts to your lower right abdomen Pain that becomes sharper over several hours Tenderness that occurs when you apply pressure to your lower right abdomen Sharp pain in your lower right abdomen that occurs when the area is pressed on and then the pressure is quickly released (rebound tenderness) Pain that worsens if you cough, walk or make other jarring movements Nausea Vomiting Loss of appetite Low-grade fever Constipation Inability to pass gas Diarrhoea Abdominal swelling The location of your pain may vary, depending on your age and the position of your appendix. Young children or pregnant women, especially, may have appendicitis pain in different places. Causes The cause of appendicitis isn't always clear. Sometimes appendicitis can occur as a result of: An obstruction . Food waste or a hard piece of stool (fecal stone) can become trapped in an orifice of the cavity that runs the length of your appendix. An infection . Appendicitis may also follow an infection, such as a gastrointestinal viral infection, or it may result from other types of inflammation. In both cases, bacteria may subsequently invade rapidly, causing the appendix to become inflamed and filled with pus. If not treated promptly, the appendix can rupture. Complications A ruptured appendix If your appendix ruptures, the contents of your intestines and infectious organisms can leak into your abdominal cavity. This can cause an infection of your abdominal cavity (peritonitis). A pocket of puss that forms in the abdomen Infection and the seepage of intestinal contents may form an abscess — a pocket of infection (appendiceal abscess). Appendiceal abscess requires treatment before the abscess tears, causing a more widespread infection of the abdominal cavity. Diagnosis The pain from appendicitis may change over time, so establishing a diagnosis can sometimes be difficult. In addition, abdominal pain can arise from a number of health problems other than appendicitis. To help diagnose appendicitis, your doctor will likely take a history of your signs and symptoms and perform a thorough examination of your abdomen. Tests and procedures used to diagnose appendicitis include : Physical exam to assess your pain. Your doctor may apply gentle pressure on the painful area. When the pressure is suddenly released, appendicitis pain will often feel worse, signaling that the adjacent peritoneum is inflamed. Other signs your doctor may watch for include abdominal rigidity and a tendency to stiffen your abdominal muscles in response to pressure over the inflamed appendix (guarding). Blood test . This allows your doctor to check for a high white blood cell count, which may indicate an infection. Urine test . Your doctor may want you to have a urinalysis to make sure that a urinary tract infection or a kidney stone isn't causing your pain. If it is a kidney stone, red blood cells are usually seen during microscopic examination of the urine. Imaging tests . Your doctor may also recommend an abdominal X-ray, an ultrasound scan or a computerized tomography (CT) scan to help confirm appendicitis or find other causes for your pain. Treatments and drugs Appendicitis treatment usually involves surgery to remove the inflamed appendix. Other treatments may be necessary depending on your situation. Surgery to remove the appendix (appendectomy) Appendectomy can be performed as open surgery using one abdominal incision that's about 2 to 4 inches (5 to 10 centimeters) long. Or appendicitis surgery can be done as a laparoscopic operation, which involves several small abdominal incisions. During a laparoscopic appendectomy, the surgeon inserts special surgical tools and a video camera into your abdomen to remove your appendix. In general, laparoscopic surgery allows you to recover faster and heal with less scarring. But laparoscopic surgery isn't appropriate for everyone. If your appendix has ruptured and infection has spread beyond the appendix or if an abscess is present, you may require an open appendectomy. An open appendectomy allows your surgeon to clean the abdominal cavity. Expect to spend one or two days in the hospital after your appendectomy. Draining an abscess before appendix surgery If an abscess is present, it may be drained by placing a tube through the skin and into the abscess. Appendectomy can be performed several weeks later after the infection is under control. Lifestyle remedies Expect a few weeks of recovery after surgery to remove your appendix. If your appendix burst, it may take longer to recover. During this recovery time, you can take steps to help your body heal after surgery, such as: Avoid strenuous activity at first. If your appendectomy was done laparoscopically, limit your activity for the first three to five days after surgery. If you had an open appendectomy, limit your activity for the first 10 to 14 days after surgery. Ask your doctor when you can go back to your normal activity. Support your abdomen when you cough. You may feel abdominal pain when you cough, laugh or make other movements. Place a pillow over your abdomen and apply pressure before these movements to brace yourself. Call your doctor if your pain medications aren't helping. Being in pain puts extra stress on your body and slows the healing process. If you're still in pain despite your pain medications, call your doctor. Get up and moving when you're ready. Start slowly and increase your activity as you feel up to it. Start with short walks. Sleep when you feel tired. As your body heals, you may find you feel sleepier than usual. Take it easy and rest when you need to. Discuss returning to work or school with your doctor. You can return to work when you feel up to it. Children may be able to return to school less than a week after surgery, though strenuous activity, such as gym class or sports, should be limited for two to four weeks after surgery. Alternative medicine Your doctor will prescribe medications to help you control your pain after your appendectomy. Some complementary and alternative treatments, when used along with your medications, can help control your pain. Ask your doctor about safe options, such as: Distracting activities, such as listening to music and talking with friends, that take your mind off your pain Guided imagery, such as closing your eyes and thinking about a favorite place References: http://www.healthline.com/health/digestive-health/appendicitis-emergency-symptoms http://www.health.com/health/gallery/0,,20552994,00.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appendicitis http://www.medicinenet.com/appendicitis/article.htm https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/A/Appendicitis/ &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin