Dexamethasone, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dexamethasone You are here: Home Dexamethasone Dexamethasone can be used to reduce inflammation or treat a number of diseases of the immune system. Why have I been prescribed Dexamethasone? Dexamethasone can be used to reduce inflammation or treat a number of diseases of the immune system. Including: Rheumatism (pain, stiffness or limitation of motion in the joints, muscles and tendons) Inflammations including inflammation of the joints and tissue around the joint ( rheumatoid arthritis ) and inflammation of the skin ( contact dermatitis ) Hypersensitivity reactions (allergic reactions) to other drugs or insect stings Anaphylactic shock (severe sudden allergic reaction) Asthma How does it work? Dexamethasone tablets belong to a group of medicines called steroids. Their full name is corticosteroids. These corticosteroids occur naturally in the body, and help to maintain health and well-being. Boosting your body with extra corticosteroid (such as Dexamethasone tablets) is an effective way to treat various illnesses involving inflammation in the body. Dexamethasone tablets reduce this inflammation, which could otherwise go on making your condition worse. You must take this medicine regularly to get maximum benefit from it. When and how do I take it? Swallow the tablets with some water. Take the tablets at about the same time each day, preferably in the morning . What’s the dose? The dosage depends on the severity of your condition and your response. The usual dosage in adults is 0.5-10 mg per day. When you get better the dosage is gradually decreased, preferably to one morning dose on alternate days. Could it interact with other tablets? &nbsp; Some medicines can diminish the effect of Dexamethasone, e.g. medicines to treat epilepsy (phenobarbitone, phenytoin, primidone and carbamazepine), medicines to treat tuberculosis (rifampin, rifabutin) and medicines to treat certain cancers (aminoglutethimide). The desired effect of antidiabetic medicines (to control blood sugar levels; including insulin), medicines to control blood pressure and diuretics (to stimulate urination) may be diminished by Dexamethasone. The effect of some medicines that are used to treat myasthenia gravis (anticholinesterases) can be diminished by Dexamethasone. The use of certain diuretics (potassium-depleting diuretics) during therapy with Dexamethasone may result in hypokalaemia (a shortage of potassium). The effect of certain anticoagulants (coumarines; to prevent blood clots) may be altered during therapy with Dexamethasone. The clearance of salicylates is increased during therapy with Dexamethasone. Therefore, if you stop using Dexamethasone, the dosage of salicylates should be lowered to prevent intoxication. Combination of corticosteroids with ulcer-inducing agents (e.g. painkillers like acetylsalicylic acid, ibuprofen) enhances the risk of peptic ulceration. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Dexamethasone can have side effects.&nbsp; On short-term treatment sometimes: gastrointestinal complaints, such as an upset or swollen&nbsp;stomach hypersensitivity reactions ( allergic reactions ) e.g. rash, itch&nbsp;and difficulty in breathing On long-term treatment: filling or rounding of the face, neck and body irregular periods or complete absence of periods abnormal hair growth weight gain increased appetite in diabetics: the need for more insulin or antidiabetic tablets increased chance of picking up infections or mild infections&nbsp;getting worse e.g. chickenpox; being less protected after&nbsp;inoculation; having a decreased response to skin test;&nbsp;recurrence of dormant tuberculosis (TB) brittle bones ( osteoporosis ) muscle weakness fluid retention in the tissues, usually marked by swelling of&nbsp;ankles or feet high blood pressure potassium loss changes of mood (nervousness, depression , euphoria, psychological dependence and schizophrenia ) sleeplessness aggravation of epilepsy certain eye diseases (increased pressure in the eye, glaucoma, papiloedema, cataracts, thinning of the cornea or&nbsp;sclera and worsening of a viral or fungal eye disease) abdominal or stomach pain candidiasis ( thrush ) slower healing of wounds easy bruising; skin problems in children: delayed or stunted growth and increased intracranial pressure (pseudo tumor cerebri) an increase in the amount of white blood cells in your blood a blood clot in your vessels In elderly: symptoms of diabetes (unusual thirst, frequent urination); loss of bone tissue with symptoms such as low back pain, loss of stature and fractures. If you notice any side effects not mentioned in this leaflet, please inform your doctor or pharmacist. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Dexamethasone. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You should only take this medicine during pregnancy or while breast feeding if your doctor thinks that you need it. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.medicinenet.com/dexamethasone-decadron-dexpak/article.htm http://www.drugs.com/dexamethasone.html https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682792.html https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dexamethasone &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin