Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Head lice You are here: Home Head lice Head lice are a very common problem, second only to the common cold among communicable diseases affecting schoolchildren. What is it? Head lice are a very common problem, second only to the common cold among communicable diseases affecting schoolchildren. Head lice are tiny, wingless, parasitic insects that live and feed on blood from your scalp. Getting head lice isn't a sign of bad personal hygiene or an unclean living environment. This itchy infestation, also called pediculosis capitis, most commonly spreads through close personal contact and by sharing personal belongings. Both over-the-counter and prescription medications are available to treat head lice. Following the directions properly and taking necessary steps at home are important to prevent head lice from recurring. Symptoms Common signs and symptoms of head lice may include: Intense itching . An allergic reaction to the saliva that lice inject during feeding may result in itchy red bumps on your scalp, neck and shoulders. Some people, particularly if this is their first infestation, don't experience itching. Adult lice on scalp . The most common spots to find adult lice are behind your ears and along the back of your neck. Lice are tiny, about the size of a strawberry seed, but they can be up to 1/8 inch (3 millimeters) in size. Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts . Nits resemble tiny pussy willow buds. Nits can be mistaken for dandruff, but unlike dandruff, they can't be easily brushed out of hair. Causes Head lice can't fly or jump, and they're not transmitted by pets. They spread by head-to-head contact or via contact with contaminated personal belongings or home furnishings. Head-to-head contact This is the most common mode of transmission and may occur as children or family members play or interact closely together. Sharing personal items Less commonly, head lice may be transmitted via such items as: Caps, hats and scarves Brushes and combs Hair decorations, such as barrettes Headphones Home furnishings Head lice may sometimes be contracted by contact with contaminated: Towels Clothing Blankets Pillows Upholstered furniture&nbsp; Risk factors The greatest risk factor for getting head lice is coming into contact with someone who already has lice. Cleanliness and personal hygiene have little bearing on whether you get lice. Young children, preschool through elementary age, are most prone to infestation, which often transfers to a child's family members. Females of all ages get head lice more often than males do. Complications Lice may cause you to scratch your head so vigorously that you break the skin. See your doctor if these scratches become infected. Diagnosis Lice cement their eggs very firmly onto the base of hair shafts, very close to the scalp. According to experts with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, nits found more than a quarter inch (6.5 millimeters) away from the scalp have either already hatched or aren't going to hatch. So simply finding nits isn't proof of an active infestation. The clearest sign is finding a living, moving louse. Combing wet hair with a fine-toothed comb is the best way to find this evidence. References: http://www.medicinenet.com/head_lice/article.htm https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/H/Head-lice/ http://kidshealth.org/en/parents/head-lice.html http://www.irishhealth.com/article.html?con=23 http://www.hedrin.ie &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... When to call the GP - For the Parents of Baby&#039;s Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin