Bad Breath | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Bad Breath You are here: Home Bad Breath Shop shelves are overflowing with mints, mouthwashes and other products designed to help people combat and prevent bad breath. Yet these products help control bad breath (halitosis) only temporarily. What is it? Store shelves are overflowing with mints, mouthwashes and other products designed to help people combat and prevent bad breath. Yet these products help control bad breath (halitosis) only temporarily. Certain foods, health conditions and habits are among the causes of bad breath. In many cases, you can improve bad breath with proper dental hygiene. But, if simple self-care techniques don't solve the problem, you may want to see your dentist to be sure a more serious condition isn't causing your bad breath. Symptoms The precise kind of bad breath odor varies depending on the source or the underlying cause of the bad breath. Causes Most bad breath originates in your mouth. The causes of bad breath are numerous. They include: Food . The breakdown of food particles in and around your teeth can cause a foul odor. Eating foods containing volatile oils is another source of bad breath. Onions and garlic are the best-known examples, but other vegetables and spices also can cause bad breath. After these foods are digested and the pungent oils are absorbed into your bloodstream, they're carried to your lungs and are given off in your breath until the food is eliminated from your body. Onions and garlic can cause bad breath for as long as 72 hours after you've eaten them. Dental problems . Poor dental hygiene and periodontal disease can be a source of bad breath. If you don't brush and floss daily, food particles remain in your mouth, collecting bacteria and emitting hydrogen sulfide vapors. A colorless, sticky film of bacteria (plaque) forms on your teeth. If not brushed away, plaque can irritate your gums (gingivitis) and cause tooth decay. Eventually, plaque-filled pockets can form between your teeth and gums (periodontitis), worsening this problem — and your breath. Dentures that aren't cleaned regularly or don't fit properly also can harbor odor-causing bacteria and food particles. Dry mouth . Saliva helps cleanse and moisten your mouth. A dry mouth enables dead cells to accumulate on your tongue, gums and cheeks. These cells then decompose and cause odor. Dry mouth naturally occurs during sleep. It's what causes "morning breath." Dry mouth is even more of a problem if you sleep with your mouth open. Some medications as well as smoking can lead to a chronic dry mouth, as can a problem with your salivary glands. Diseases . Chronic lung infections and lung abscesses can produce very foul-smelling breath. Other illnesses, such as some cancers and certain metabolic disorders, can cause a distinctive breath odor. Kidney failure can cause a urine-like odor, and liver failure may cause an odor described as "fishy." People with uncontrolled diabetes often have a fruity breath odor. Chronic reflux of stomach acids from your stomach (gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD) also has been associated with bad breath. Mouth, nose and throat conditions . Bad breath is also associated with sinus infections because nasal discharge from your sinuses into the back of your throat can cause mouth odor. A child with bad breath may have a foreign object lodged in his or her nose. A bean or small item stuck in the nose can cause persistent nasal discharge and a foul odor. Throat infections can cause bad breath until they clear. Bronchitis and other upper respiratory infections in which you cough up odorous sputum are other sources of bad breath. Tobacco products . Smoking dries out your mouth and causes its own unpleasant mouth odor. Tobacco users are also more likely to have periodontal disease, an additional source of bad breath. Severe dieting . Dieters may develop unpleasant "fruity" breath from ketoacidosis, the breakdown of chemicals during fasting. Treatments and drugs Treatment for bad breath can vary, depending on the cause. If your bad breath is found to be caused by an underlying health condition, your dentist will likely attempt to help you better control that condition. Other dental measures may include certain mouthwashes and toothpastes or treatment of dental disease. Mouth rinses and toothpastes. If your bad breath is due to a buildup of bacteria (plaque) on your teeth, your dentist may recommend a mouth rinse that kills the bacteria. Research shows that those containing cetylpyridinium chloride and those with chlorhexidine can prevent production of odors that cause bad breath. Other active ingredients, such as chlorine dioxide and zinc, are good at neutralizing odor-causing bacterial byproducts. Your dentist may also recommend a toothpaste that contains an antibacterial agent to kill the bacteria that cause plaque buildup. Treatment of dental disease. If your dentist discovers that you have gum disease, you may be referred to a periodontist (gum specialist). Gum disease can cause the gums to pull away from the teeth, leaving deep pockets that accumulate odor-causing bacteria. Sometimes these bacteria can be removed only by professional cleaning. Your dentist might also recommend replacing faulty tooth restorations, which can be a breeding ground for bacteria. Lifestyle remedies Try the following steps to improve or prevent bad breath: Brush your teeth after you eat. Keep a toothbrush at work to brush after eating. Be sure to brush at least twice a day, especially after meals. Toothpaste with antibacterial properties has been shown to reduce bad breath odors for up to 12 hours. Floss at least once a day . Proper flossing removes food particles and plaque from between your teeth. Brush your tongue. A tongue scraper is more effective than a brush for reducing odors that originate from the tongue. Another option is to use a toothbrush with a built-in tongue cleaner on the back. These brushes reportedly work just as well as scrapers. Clean your dentures well. If you wear a bridge or a partial or complete denture, clean it thoroughly at least once a day or as directed by your dentist. Drink plenty of water. To keep your mouth moist, be sure to drink plenty of water — not coffee, soft drinks or alcohol, which can lead to a drier mouth. Chewing gum (preferably sugarless) or sucking on candy (preferably sugarless) also stimulates saliva, washing away food particles and bacteria. If you have chronic dry mouth, your dentist or doctor may additionally prescribe an artificial saliva preparation or an oral medication that stimulates the flow of saliva. Adjust your diet. Decrease alcohol and coffee intake and avoid other food and beverages that can precipitate bad breath. Eating fibrous foods can help. Use a fairly new toothbrush. Change your toothbrush every three to four months, and choose a soft-bristled toothbrush. Schedule regular dental checkups. At least twice a year, see your dentist to have your teeth or dentures examined and cleaned. References: http://articles.mercola.com/bad-breath.aspx http://www.medicinenet.com/bad_breath/article.htm http://www.colgate.com/en/us/oc/oral-health/conditions/bad-breath/article/ada-03-what-causes-bad-breath http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/bad-breath/Pages/causes.aspx http://patient.info/health/bad-breath-halitosis &nbsp; Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin