Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Abilify - (Aripipr... Accolate - (Zafirl... Accupro - (Quinapr... Accuretic Tablets AceryCal 5/5: 10/1... Actonel 30mg Table... Actonel 5mg Actonel Combi Actonel Once a Wee... Actonel Plus Ca... Actos Tablets Actrapid actroban Cream/Oin... Adalat Adenuric Adizem SR Adizem XL Advil Liquigels (O... Aero-chamber Devic... Affex Airomir Akineton - (Biperi... Aldactide Aldactone Aldara Cream Allopurinol Almogran (almotrip... Aloe Vera Alopur Alpha lipoic acid Alprazolam AltavitaD3 Amaryl Amitriptyline Amlid (Amlodipine)... Amlist (Amlodipine... Amlode (Amlodipine... Amlodipine Amlotan (Amlodipin... Amoclav Tablets Amoxicillin Amoxicillin/clavul... Amoxil Capsules... Anafranil Anapen Anastrozole Tablet... Angeliq Tablets Anhydrol Forte Anoro Ellipta Antabuse Tablets Antacids Anti-anxiety drugs Antibiotics Antidepressants Antifungal medicin... Antihistamines Antiviral medicine... Anxicalm Apidra SoloStar pe... Aprovel Aqueous Cream Arava Arcoxia Aricept Arimidex Aromasin Artelac Arthrotec Asacolon Aspirin - (Nu-Seal... Atacand - (Candesa... Atacand Plus Atecor - (Atenolol... Atenetic Ativan - (Lorazepa... Atorvas Atorvastatin Atrovent Inhaler Atrovent Nebuliser... Aubagio (terifluno... Augmentin Duo Susp... Augmentin Duo Tabl... Augmentin Paediatr... Avamys Nasal Spray... Avandia Avastin Avelox - (Moxiflox... Avodart (Dutasteri... Avonex (Interferon... Axsain Cream Azalia Tablets (De... Azilect Azithromycin Capsu... Azopt Eye Drops Azyter Eye Drops Medicine - A Abilify - (Aripiprazole) Abilify is used to relieve the symptoms of schizophrenia, mania (high mood swings), and other similar mental health problems. Accolate - (Zafirlukast) Accolate contains a medicine called zafirlukast. This belongs to a group of medicines called leukotriene antagonists. Accolate is used to control the symptoms of your asthma, and prevent your asthma from getting worse. Accupro - (Quinapril) Accupro (Quinapril) can be used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. Accuretic Tablets Accuretic belongs to a group of medicines called angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and can be used to treat high blood pressure. AceryCal 5/5: 10/10 Tablets Substitution therapy for the treatment of essential hypertension and/or stable coronary artery disease in patients already controlled with perindopril and amlodipine given concurrently at the same dose level. Actonel 30mg Tablets Actonel (Risedronate) 30mg is used in the treatment of Paget’s disease of the bone (osteitis deformans). Actonel 5mg Actonel is used in the treatment and prevention of osteoporosis. Actonel Combi Actonel Combi is used in the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women who also need daily calcium supplementation as assessed by their doctor. Actonel Once a Week Actonel (Risedronate) is used in the treatment of osteoporosis, • in postmenopausal women, even if osteoporosis is severe. • in men. Actonel Plus Ca &amp; D The treatment of osteoporosis, even if severe, in postmenopausal women who also need daily calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation as assessed by their doctor. It reduces the risk of spinal and hip fractures. Actos Tablets Actos (Pioglitazone) is an anti-diabetic medicine used to treat type 2 (non-insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus. Actos tablets helps control the level of sugar in your blood when you have type 2 diabetes by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Actrapid Actrapid is human insulin to treat diabetes. Actrapid is a fast-acting insulin. This means that it will start to lower your blood sugar about half an hour after you take it, and the effect will last for approximately 8 hours. Actrapid is often given in combination with longer-acting insulin products actroban Cream/Ointment Bactroban is a topical antibacterial agent, active against those organisms responsible for the majority of skin infections, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin-resistant strains, other staphylococci, streptococci. It is also active against Gram-negative organisms such as Escherichia coli and Haemophilus influenzae. Bactroban Ointment is used for skin infections, e.g. impetigo, folliculitis, furunculosis. Adalat It has been prescribed by your doctor to treat your high blood pressure or to reduce the frequency of your anginal attacks. Adenuric Adenuric tablets contain the active ingredient febuxostat, which is a type of medicine called a xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat is used to treat gout. Adizem SR Adizem SR (Diltiazem) is used to treat hypertension and angina. Adizem XL Adizem XL (Diltiazem) is used to treat hypertension and angina. Advil Liquigels (OTC) (Ibuprofen) Ibuprofen helps to reduce inflammation and to reduce pain. Ibuprofen can take a few weeks to help improve inflammation but can start to relieve pain after the first few doses. Aero-chamber Device INDICATIONS FOR USE AND CAUTIONS This product is intended to be used by patients who are under the care or treatment of a physician or licensed healthcare professional. The device is intended to be used by these patients to administer aerosolized medication from most pressurized Metered Dose Inhalers. The intended environments for use include the home, hospitals and clinics. &nbsp; Affex Affex (Fluoxetine) is used to treat the following conditions: Adults: • Major depressive episodes • Obsessive-compulsive disorder • Bulimia nervosa: Affex is used alongside psychotherapy for the reduction of binge-eating and purging Airomir Airomir inhaler contains the active ingredient salbutamol, which is a type of medicine known as a short-acting beta 2 agonist. Salbutamol is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Akineton - (Biperiden) Akineton is an antiparkinsonian agent of the anticholinergic type. It may also be used to reduce the shakiness and restlessness that can be caused by some tranquilizers or antipsychotic medications. Aldactide Aldactide is a diuretic medicine (“water tablet”) used for the treatment of congestive heart failure or high blood pressure (hypertension). Aldactone Aldactone is used to treat congestive heart failure and high blood pressure. Aldara Cream Imiquimod cream is indicated for the topical treatment of: External genital and perianal warts (condylomata acuminata) in adults. Small superficial basal cell carcinomas (sBCCs) in adults. Clinically typical, nonhyperkeratotic, nonhypertrophic actinic keratoses (AKs) on the face or scalp in immunocompetent adult patients when size or number of lesions limit the efficacy and/or acceptability of cryotherapy and other topical treatment options are contraindicated or less appropriate. Allopurinol Allopurinol belongs to a class of medicines called anti-gout medicines. It is used to prevent gout, kidney stones, or hyperuricaemia during cancer treatment Almogran (almotriptan) Almogran tablets contain the active ingredient almotriptan, which is a type of medicine called a serotonin (or 5HT) agonist. This type of medicine is also commonly known as a 'triptan'. It is a painkiller specifically used to relieve migraine attacks. Aloe Vera Early study of aloe lotion suggests effectiveness for treating seborrheic dermatitis when applied to the skin.&nbsp; Alopur Alopur (Allopurinol) belongs to a class of medicines called anti-gout medicines. It is used to prevent gout, kidney stones, or hyperuricaemia during cancer treatment Alpha lipoic acid Many studies have shown that ALA may improve blood sugar levels among patients with type 2 diabetes. Higher-quality studies are needed to provide more..... Alprazolam Alprazolam tablets are only used to treat severe anxiety and severe anxiety associated with depression. AltavitaD3 Altavita D3 1000 IU, 7000 IU, 25000 IU soft capsules and 25,000 IU oral solution are licensed: - For the prevention and treatment of vitamin D deficiency - As an adjunct to specific therapy for osteoporosis in patients with vitamin D deficiency, or at risk of vitamin D insufficiency. Amaryl Amaryl (Glimepride) is used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, when diet, physical exercise and weight reduction alone are not adequate. Amitriptyline Amitriptyline belongs to a group of medicines called tricyclic antidepressant drugs. Amitriptyline is used: to treat the symptoms of depression. for the relief of bed-wetting at night by children. Amlid (Amlodipine) Tablets Amlid (Amlodipine) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Amlist (Amlodipine) Tablets Amlist (Amlodipine) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Amlode (Amlodipine) Tablets Amlode (Amlodipine) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Amlodipine Amlodipine is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Amlotan (Amlodipine) Tablets Amlotan (Amlodipine) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Amoclav Tablets Amoclav is a&nbsp; penicillin&nbsp; antibiotic&nbsp;that contains two medicines -&nbsp; amoxicillin &nbsp;trihydrate and potassium clavulanate. They work together to kill certain types of bacteria and are used to treat certain types of bacterial infections.&nbsp;Amoclav&nbsp;is usually used for up to14 days initially, and then your doctor will review the need for you to have further treatment with&nbsp;Amoclav. If your symptoms continue or become worse you should contact your doctor. Amoxicillin Amoxicillin is a penicillin antibiotic. It fights bacteria in your body. Amoxicillin is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria, such as ear infections, bladder infections, pneumonia, gonorrhea, and E. coli or salmonella infection. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid Tablets Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid Tablets is a medicine which is used in certain types of bacterial infections. Augmentin-Duo contains amoxicillin trihydrate/potassium clavulanate. Amoxil Capsules &amp; Suspension Amoxil is a penicillin antibiotic. It fights bacteria in your body. Amoxil is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria, such as ear infections, bladder infections, pneumonia, gonorrhea, and E. coli or salmonella infection. Anafranil Anafranil (Clomipramine) is used to treat depression, obsessions and phobias (irrational fears). It is also used to treat muscular weakness (cataplexy) associated with repeat attacks of extreme sleepiness (narcolepsy) in adults. Anapen Anapen, EpiPen and EpiPen Jr auto-injectors both contain the active ingredient adrenaline, which is a hormone produced naturally by the body. Anastrozole Tablets Arimidex (anastrozole) is a drug used to treat breast cancer in post-menopausal women. If you have primary breast cancer you will take Arimidex for five years. If you have been changed from Tamoxifen to Arimidex you will continue to take Arimidex for the remainder of your five years of treatment. Angeliq Tablets Angeliq tablets contain two active ingredients, estradiol and drospirenone. These are forms of the main female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Estradiol is a naturally occuring form of oestrogen and drospirenone is a synthetic form of progesterone. Anhydrol Forte For the topical treatment of hyperhidrosis specifically involving axillae, hands or feet. Anoro Ellipta Anoro ellipta inhaler contains two active ingredients, umeclidinium and vilanterol. These work in different ways to relax and open the airways and make it easier to breathe. In chronic obstructive lung diseases (COPD), such as chronic bronchitis or emphysema, the airways are narrowed and this makes breathing difficult. Antabuse Tablets Antabuse tablets contain the active ingredient disulfiram, which is a type of medicine called an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor. It is prescribed to recovering alcoholics to help them abstain from drinking alcohol. If someone taking this medicine drinks alcohol, it quickly causes a severe, unpleasant and potentially dangerous reaction and knowledge of this fact can help to stop people from drinking. Antacids Antacids are a type of medication that can control the acid levels in your stomach. They are available over the counter from pharmacies and are commonly used to treat the symptoms of heartburn and indigestion. Anti-anxiety drugs An anxiolytic is a drug used for the treatment of symptoms of anxiety. Anxiolytics have been shown to be useful in the treatment of anxiety disorders. Antibiotics Bacteria are tiny organisms that can sometimes cause illness to humans and animals. Antidepressants An antidepressant is a psychiatric medication used to alleviate mood disorders, such as major depression and dysthymia and anxiety disorders such as social anxiety disorder. Antifungal medicines There are several different antifungal preparations that are used to treat various fungal infections.They come as creams, shampoos, pessaries, medicines to take by mouth, and injections. Antihistamines Antihistamines are a type of medicine often used to treat a number of allergic health conditions. Antiviral medicines Antiviral drugs are a class of medication used specifically for treating viral infections. Like antibiotics for bacteria, specific antivirals are used for specific viruses. Anxicalm Anxicalm is used for: Anxiety and problems sleeping (insomnia). Muscle spasms (cramps) such as those caused by cerebral spasticity. Epilepsy (fits). Making you relaxed before an operation (premedication) Apidra SoloStar pens/cartridges Apidra SoloStar pre-filled pens and Apidra penfill cartridges, contain the active ingredient insulin glulisine. They are used to treat diabetes. Aprovel Aprovel (Irbesartan) is used: to treat high blood pressure (essential hypertension) to protect the kidney in patients with high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and evidence of impaired kidney function Aqueous Cream Aqueous cream is used for the relief of the symptoms of dry skin conditions. Arava Arava (Leflunomide) is used to treat adult patients with active rheumatoid arthritis or with active psoriatic arthritis. Arcoxia Arcoxia tablets contain the active ingredient etoricoxib, which is a type of medicine known as a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Aricept Aricept is a drug prescribed to treat mild stage Alzheimer’s disease. Arimidex Arimidex (anastrozole) is a drug used to treat breast cancer in post-menopausal women. If you have primary breast cancer you will take Arimidex for five years. If you have been changed from Tamoxifen to Arimidex you will continue to take Arimidex for the remainder of your five years of treatment. Aromasin Aromasin (Exemestane) is a drug used to treat breast cancer in postmenopausal women (women who have gone through the menopause/change of life). Aromasin may be prescribed if your breast cancer comes back or progresses while you are taking tamoxifen. Artelac Artelac eye drops contain the active ingredient hypromellose, which is a type of medicine known as an eye lubricant. Arthrotec Arthrotec helps to relieve the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, and may help to protect patients at risk of irritation or ulceration of the stomach or intestines. Asacolon Asacolon (Mesalazine) is an anti-inflammatory medicine used to treat ulcerative colitis and to prevent further episodes of Crohn’s disease. Aspirin - (Nu-Seals 75mgs) Aspirin has a blood thinning action which has been shown to be useful following heart attack and in patients with unstable angina or ischaemic stroke. Nu-Seals 75 is used wherever prolonged dosage of aspirin is required. Nu-Seals 75 is unsuitable for the short-term relief of pain. Atacand - (Candesartan) Atacand is used for treating high blood pressure (hypertension) and heart failure. Atacand Plus The name of your medicine is Atacand Plus. It is used for treating high blood pressure (hypertension). It contains two active ingredients: candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide. These work together to lower your blood pressure. Atecor - (Atenolol) Atecor (Atenolol) is used in the treatment of – hypertension, angina pectoris, cardiac dysrhythmias and Myocardial infarction: early intervention in the acute phase. Atenetic Atenetic (Atenolol/Chlorthalidone) tablets are used in the management of hypertension: This is a combination product (contains two drugs) which may be suitable for use when satisfactory control of blood pressure cannot be obtained with either drug is used alone. Ativan - (Lorazepam) Ativan (Lorazepam) is a medicine which is used to treat anxiety, excitement, mania and status epilepticus. Ativan is also used as a pre-operative medication. Atorvas In this article I will discuss the cholesterol lowering medicine - Atorvas. I will look at various issues such as why Atorvas is prescribed, how Atorvas works and what the common and not so common side effects are. Atorvas is the generic version of Lipitor. Atorvastatin In this article I will investigate the cholesterol lowering medicine - Atorvastatin. I will look at various issues such as why Atorvastatin is prescribed, how Atorvastatin works and what the common and not so common side effects are. Atorvastatin is the generic version of Lipitor. Atrovent Inhaler Atrovent inhaler and Atrovent UDVs both contain the active ingredient ipratropium bromide, which is a type of medicine called an antimuscarinic bronchodilator. Ipratropium nebuliser solution is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Ipratropium works by opening the airways to make it easier to breathe. Atrovent Nebuliser Solution (U.D.V.) Atrovent inhaler and Atrovent UDVs both contain the active ingredient ipratropium bromide, which is a type of medicine called an antimuscarinic bronchodilator. Ipratropium nebuliser solution is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Ipratropium works by opening the airways to make it easier to breathe. Aubagio (teriflunomide) Tablets Aubagio is a Disease Modifying Treatment (DMT) for relapsing remitting MS. You have fewer relapses than you might have had with no treatment and any relapses you do have should be less severe. In clinical trials people taking Aubagio had in the range of 30% fewer relapses than people taking placebo. In clinical trials, MRI scans showed people taking Aubagio had fewer, smaller or no new areas of active MS (lesions). Aubagio also slows down the build-up of disability associated with MS. Augmentin Duo Suspension Augmentin-Duo Suspension is a&nbsp; penicillin&nbsp; antibiotic &nbsp;that contains two medicines -&nbsp; amoxicillin &nbsp;trihydrate and potassium clavulanate. They work together to kill certain types of bacteria and are used to treat certain types of bacterial infections. Augmentin Duo Tablets Augmentin-Duo is a medicine which is used in certain types of bacterial infections. Augmentin-Duo contains amoxicillin trihydrate/potassium clavulanate. Augmentin Paediatric Suspension Augmentin Paediatric 125mg/31.25mg/5ml Suspension&nbsp;is a&nbsp; penicillin &nbsp;antibiotic&nbsp;that contains two medicines -&nbsp; amoxicillin &nbsp;trihydrate and potassium clavulanate. They work together to kill certain types of bacteria and are used to treat certain types of bacterial infections. &nbsp; Avamys Nasal Spray (fluticasone) Avamys nasal spray contains the active ingredient fluticasone furoate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Avandia Avandia is used to treat type 2 diabetes. Avandia helps to reduce your blood sugar towards a normal level, by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Avandia can be used alone or in combination with other medicines to treat diabetes (such as Glucophage or Amaryl). Avastin Avastin is a medicine used to treat cancer in the bowel, lung, breast or kidney. Avelox - (Moxifloxacin) Moxifloxacin is used to treat a variety of bacterial infections (such as bronchitis, pneumonia and sinusitis). It is used to treat these infections in people who have not improved with other antibiotic treatment or in people who cannot be treated with other antibiotics. Avodart (Dutasteride) This medication is used in men to treat the symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia-BPH). It works by reducing the size of the enlarged prostate. This helps to relieve symptoms of BPH such as difficulty in beginning the flow of urine, weak stream, and the need to urinate frequently or urgently (including during the middle of the night). It may also reduce the need for surgery to treat BPH. Avonex (Interferon Beta) Avonex (Interferon Beta) is used to treat Multiple Sclerosis (MS). Treatment with Avonex can help to prevent you from getting worse, although it will not cure MS. It can help to reduce the number of relapses that you have and slow down the disabling effects of MS. Axsain Cream For the symptomatic relief of neuralgia associated with and following Herpes Zoster infections (post-herpetic neuralgia) after open skin lesions have healed. For the symptomatic management of painful diabetic peripheral polyneuropathy. Azalia Tablets (Desogestrel) Cerazette tablets are a type of hormonal contraceptive commonly known as the 'mini pill' or progestogen-only pill (POP). Azilect Azilect is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. It can be used together with or without Levodopa (another medicine that is used to treat Parkinson’s disease). Azithromycin Capsules/Suspension Azithromycin (Zithromax) is used to treat many different types of infections caused by bacteria, such as respiratory infections, skin infections, ear infections, and sexually transmitted diseases. Azopt Eye Drops Azopt is indicated to decrease elevated intraocular pressure in: ocular hypertension open-angle glaucoma as monotherapy in adult patients unresponsive to beta-blockers or in adult patients in whom beta-blockers are contraindicated, or as adjunctive therapy to beta-blockers or prostaglandin analogues Azyter Eye Drops Azyter eye drops contain the active ingredient azithromycin, which is a type of medicine called macrolide antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin