Zyloric Allopurinol Tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Allopurinol You are here: Home Allopurinol Allopurinol belongs to a class of medicines called anti-gout medicines. It is used to prevent gout, kidney stones, or hyperuricaemia during cancer treatment Why have I been prescribed Allopurinol? Allopurinol belongs to a class of medicines called anti- gout&nbsp; medicines. It is used to prevent&nbsp; gout, &nbsp; kidney stones, &nbsp;or hyperuricaemia during&nbsp; cancer &nbsp;treatment How does it work? Allopurinol reduces the amount of uric acid in the body by blocking one of the processes that makes it. This helps to stop the level of uric acid in the blood from becoming too high and causing problems like&nbsp; gout &nbsp;or&nbsp; kidney stones. When and how do I take Allopurinol? Zyloric may be taken orally once a day after a meal. It is well tolerated, especially after food. Should the daily dosage exceed 300mg and gastrointestinal intolerance be manifested, a divided dose regimen may be appropriate. What’s the dose? Zyloric should be introduced at low dosage e.g. 100mg/day to reduce the risk of adverse reactions and increased only if the response is unsatisfactory. Extra caution should be exercised if renal function is poor.&nbsp; The following dosage schedules are suggested: 100 to 200mg daily in mild conditions, 300 to 600mg daily in moderately severe conditions, 700 to 900mg daily in severe conditions. Dosage higher than 300mg should be given in divided doses not exceeding 300mg at any time. If dosage on a mg/kg bodyweight basis is required, 2 to 10 mg/kg bodyweight/day should be used. Where available, Zyloric granules should be used in preference to the halving of tablets Could it interact with other tablets? Tell your prescriber the names of all the medicines that you are taking so that they can consider all possible interactions. This includes all the medicines which have been prescribed by your GP, hospital doctor, dentist, nurse, health visitor, midwife or pharmacist.&nbsp;You must also tell your prescriber about medicines which you have bought over the counter without prescriptions. The following medicines may interact with Allopurinol: 6-mercaptopurine amoxicillin ampicillin azathioprine bleomycin chlorpropamide ciclosporin cyclophosphamide didanosine doxorubicin mechloroethamine phenytoin probenecid procarbazine theophylline vidarabine warfarin The following types of medicine may interact with Allopurinol: ACE inhibitors coumarin anticoagulants cytotoxics diuretics salicylates uricosuric agents If you are taking Allopurinol and one of the above medicines or types of medicines, make sure your prescriber knows about it. Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Everyone's reaction to a medicine is different. It is difficult to predict which side-effects you will have from taking a particular medicine, or whether you will have any side-effects at all. The important thing is to tell your prescriber or pharmacist if you are having problems with your medicine. Common: More than 1 in 100 people who take Allopurinol: hypersensitivity reactions including skin reactions, Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis, which can be fatal. You should seek immediate medical advice if you develop a rash, &nbsp;fever,&nbsp; itching, &nbsp;scaly or flaking skin, unexplained or easy bruising of the skin or mucous membranes, angioedema or anaphylactic shock. Some types of skin reactions may occur with joint pains, lymphadenopathy, liver problems , &nbsp;kidney problems&nbsp;or seizure. Uncommon: More than 1 in 1000 people who take Allopurinol: abnormal laboratory test results nausea vomiting Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Allopurinol Always ask you doctor or pharmacist&nbsp;however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? you should only take this medicine during pregnancy if your doctor thinks that you need it this medicine passes into breast milk. It is not known if taking Allopurinol and breast-feeding may affect your baby If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://xpil.medicines.org.uk/viewpil.aspx?docid=4255 http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/aches-and-pains/medicines/zyloric.html http://www.drugs.com/uk/zyloric-tablets-100mg-300mg-spc-2927.html http://www.medicinanet.com.br/bula/5610/zyloric.htm http://www.pharmacygeoff.md/Zyloric_Allopurinol_100mg_10_Tablets_p_533.html http://www.mims.com/India/drug/info/ZYLORIC/ZYLORIC%20tab http://www.procanadadrugs.com/zyloric-allopurinol-100mg.html Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin