Weight Loss | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Weight Loss You are here: Home Weight Loss Research tells us that by increasing physical activity and improving eating habits, coupled with effectively managing stress, you can better manage your weight. It’s very hard to manage your weight on your own, and that&#039;s where we come in, we motivate you to keep you on target from weekly meetings. &nbsp; About excess weight Excess weight is the most prevalent, fatal, chronic, relapsing disorder of the 21st century. It is likely that the increase in Obesity will strain our healthcare system with millions of additional cases of Diabetes, Heart Disease and disability. Excess Weight is defined as excess adipose tissue. There are several different methods for determining excess adipose (fat) tissue; the most common being the Body Mass Index (BMI). A fat cell is an endocrine cell and adipose tissue is an endocrine organ. As such, adipose tissue secretes a number of products, including metabolites, cytokines, lipids, and coagulation factors among others. Significantly, excess adiposity or Obesity causes insulin secretion, which can cause insulin resistance that leads to type 2 Diabetes. Obesity levels in Ireland have reached “epidemic proportions” affecting up to a fifth of all adults and resulting in 2,000 premature deaths annually, according to experts. How We Help Research tells us that by increasing physical activity and improving eating habits, coupled with effectively managing Stress , you can better manage your weight. It’s very hard to manage your weight on your own, and again, research has shown the effective weight management should not be over a specific period of time, such as a 3 month programme, but managed over the long term, either weekly or forthnightly visits, ongoing indefinitely. We have a proven Weight Management Programme, based on good science. This programme is available to all customers of the pharmacy. This revolutionary new approach to weight management, (we are the first in Ireland &amp; the U.K. to use this approach), is based on the “Algorithm for weight management” protocol. We calculate your “resting metabolic rate” using the latest in sports medicine technology, and we use this number to build your unique diet and lifestyle. We are aware that a “one size fits all” approach simply does not work in managing weight. What we offer is a unique programme, specifically designed around each individual’s metabolism, like a finger print. Through our website, you can access our library of information on all things to do with managing your weight. We provide easy access to videos and articles on all things to do with treating, managing and living with obesity. Let Olympic and World Championship Silver Medal athlete Gillian O’Sullivan get you started on an exercise plan, or for something less physical, you can join Sinead &amp; Jez, our Yoga and Tai chi masters, where they will introduce you to balance and posture exercises. Regular yoga practice is also associated with mindful eating, and people who eat mindfully are less likely to be Obese , according to a study led by researchers at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. No weight management programme would be complete without addressing nutrition. On this website you get access to our calorie controlled food recipe archive. You decide what you want to eat, and the amount of calories you require, and simply follow our online recipe to prepare nutritious calorie controlled meals...couldn’t be easier! Keeping in touch with the latest research (such as focusing on immediate health effects) is an important part of weight management, as it provides us with new management options, and keeps weight management both fresh and interesting. That’s what we do. Stress management must be a central piece of any management solution. We provide effective and proven stress management strategies in the ‘Complimentary Therapy” area of our web site. We also provide a comprehensive guide on getting started on each therapy. This total weight management solution, which brings together for the first time, conventional medicine , and where strong scientific evidence exists for the appropriate alternative medicine and alternative therapies. &nbsp; References: http://www.nhs.uk/LiveWell/loseweight/Pages/Loseweighthome.aspx http://www.webmd.com/diet/lose-weight-fast-how-to-do-it-safely https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/O/Obesity/ http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/weight-loss/in-depth/weight-loss-drugs/art-20044832 Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Xenical - (Orlistat) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin