Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Occlusal paint Oestrogel (estradi... Olanzapine Olmesartan Tablets Olumiant Tablets Omacor Capsules Omega 3 Fish Oils Omeprazole Omesar Plus Omesar Tablets Omnexel Tablets -... Onbrez breezhaler One-Alpha (alfacal... Opatanol Eye Drops... Oprymea (Pramipexo... Optimax Capsules Oralair sublingual Orencia (abatacept... Osteofos D3 OsvaRen Tablets Otezla (apremilast... Ovitrelle (choriog... Ovranette Ovreena Contracept... Oxis Turbohaler Oxycontin Tablets Oxynorm Tablets Ozempic (semagluti... Medicine - O Occlusal paint Occlusal paint is a liquid containing the active ingredient salicylic acid. This is a type of medicine known as a keratolytic. Oestrogel (estradiol) Moderate-to-severe vasomotor symptoms of menopause. Vulvar and vaginal atrophy due to menopause. Olanzapine Olanzapine is an antipsychotic medication that affects chemicals in the brain. Olanzapine is used to treat the symptoms of psychotic conditions such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (manic depression) in adults and children who are at least 13 years old. Olmesartan Tablets Olmesartan is used to treat hypertension (high blood pressure). Olumiant Tablets Olumiant Tablets (Baricitinib) is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis. It helps decrease pain, tenderness, and swelling in the joints. Omacor Capsules Omacor belongs to a group of so called reducers of cholesterol and triglycerides. Omacor is used: • together with other medicines for treatment after a heart attack. • to treat certain forms of increased triglycerides (fats) in the blood after changes to the diet have not worked. Omega 3 Fish Oils Recent work reports that the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) found in fish oil increases the production of LR11, a protein that is found at reduced levels in Alzheimer's patients and which is known to destroy the protein that forms the "plaques" associated with the disease. Omeprazole Omeprazole is a generic brand of Losec and is used to treat a variety of stomach problems involving irritation due to stomach acid. Omesar Plus Omesar plus tablets contain two active ingredients, olmesartan and hydrochlorothiazide. Olmesartan is a type of medicine called an angiotensin II receptor antagonist. Hydrochlorothiazide is a type of medicine called a thiazide diuretic. These are both medicines used to lower high blood pressure. Omesar Tablets Omesar (Olmesartan) is used to treat hypertension (high blood pressure). Omnexel Tablets - (Tamsulosin) Omnexel Tablets - (Tamsulosin) is an alpha-blocker that relaxes the muscles in the prostate and bladder neck, making it easier to urinate. Onbrez breezhaler Onbrez breezhaler contains the active ingredient indacaterol, which a type of medicine called a long-acting beta 2 agonist. &nbsp; One-Alpha (alfacalcidol) One-Alpha capsules, drops and injection all contain the active ingredient alfacalcidol, which is a form of vitamin D. Opatanol Eye Drops (olopatadine) Opatanol is used to treat the eye symptoms of seasonal allergic conjunctivitis (inflammation of the eyes caused by pollen in patients with hayfever). These include itching, redness and swelling. Oprymea (Pramipexole) Oprymea (pramipexole) tablets and Oprymea (pramipexole) prolonged-release tablets both contain the active ingredient pramipexole, which is a type of medicine called a dopamine agonist. Optimax Capsules Optimax (L-Tryptophan) is used in the treatment of depression when other treatments have not worked, and as an add-on treatment to other anti-depressant medication. Oralair sublingual ORALAIR is a sublingual (under the tongue) grass allergy immunotherapy tablet used to treat symptoms of allergies to the grass pollens in ORALAIR. It is an allergy immunotherapy, which means that it works differently than other medicines you may take when you experience bothersome allergy symptoms. Orencia (abatacept) Injection Orencia infusion and injection contain the active ingredient abatacept, which is a type of medicine called a selective immunosuppressant. It is used to treat severe forms of rheumatoid arthritis. Osteofos D3 Osteofos D3 is a calcium and vitamin D3 supplement for the treatment of certain bone conditions in the elderly. Both calcium and vitamin D are found in the diet and vitamin D is also produced in the skin following exposure to the sun. &nbsp; OsvaRen Tablets Treatment of hyperphosphatemia associated with chronic renal insufficiency in patients undergoing dialysis (haemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis). Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin