Dipentum, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dipentum Capsules You are here: Home Dipentum Capsules Dipentum Capsules are given by your doctor to treat an inflammation of your large intestine (colon) called ulcerative colitis. It is used in acute attacks (“flare-ups”), and at a lower dose to maintain the improvement (maintenance treatment) and ward off further flare-ups. Why have I been prescribed Dipentum? Dipentum Capsules are given by your doctor to treat an inflammation of your large intestine (colon) called ulcerative colitis. It is used in acute attacks (“flare-ups”), and at a lower dose to maintain the improvement (maintenance treatment) and ward off further flare-ups. If flare-ups are severe other medicines may be given as well. How does it work? Dipentum acts locally at the inflamed sites to reduce the inflammation . When and how do I take it? The capsules should be taken with a glass of water at the end of a meal. What’s the dose? Unless your doctor has told you otherwise, the usual doses are: Acute ulcerative colitis: You should start with two capsules twice a day (two in the morning, two in the evening) and over a period of a week increase the dose until benefit is noticed. You must not take more than twelve capsules a day, and not take more than four at a time. Maintenance treatment: Once the flare-up is controlled your doctor may gradually reduce the dose to two capsules taken twice a day at the end of a meal. This is to prevent further flare-ups, and you may be on this treatment for some time. If a flare-up is severe you are likely to be given additional medicines. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor if you are taking any other medicines, including those not on prescription. In particular, tell your doctor if are taking or have taken any of the following: low molecular weight heparins for thinning the blood and treating and preventing clots. warfarin for thinning the blood, preventing clots. 6-mercaptopurine or thioguanine It is recommended not to give salicylates for six weeks after the varicella vaccine Herbal products should also only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? This medicine may cause side effects in some people, including: Headache gut pain upset stomach rash, itching joint or muscle pain watery bowel motions The watery bowel motions may respond to more care in taking the tablets at the end of a meal, and frequently improve over a few days anyway. Other reported effects include increased heart rate or awareness of your heartbeat, difficulty breathing, pins and needles, pain in passing urine or blood in the urine, depression and blurred vision. Very rarely your medicine may affect your blood, reducing the number of re or white blood cells and the platelets. If you have a persistent sore throat, feel “under the weather”, bruise easily or feel tired and feverish you should contact your doctor as soon as possible. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Dipentum. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Olsalazine should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus. Unless the benefit of the treatment outweighs the risks, olsalazine should not be taken by breast-feeding women, or patients should be advised to discontinue breastfeeding if using olsalazine. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/fda/fdaDrugXsl.cfm?setid=f4858879-0b8b-484a-9742-112c92662e8a&amp;type=display http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/10523/SPC/Dipentum+250mg+Capsules/ http://www.rxlist.com/dipentum-drug.htm http://www.drugs.com/uk/dipentum-capsules-250mg-leaflet.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/digestive-health/a6586/dipentum-olsalazine/ &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Ulcerative Colitis Print This Page Health Reference Ulcerative Colitis Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin