Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Halcion Tablets Half-Beta Prograne... Herceptin Hibiscus Hormone Therapy Humalog (insulin l... Humira Injection Humulin M3 Huperzine A Hydrea (hydroxycar... Hydrocortisyl Crea... Hydroxocobalamin I... Medicine - H Halcion Tablets Halcion is used for the short term treatment of insomnia (difficulty in falling asleep or sleeping properly) and so you will not usually be given Halcion tablets to take for more than 2-3 weeks. Talk to your doctor about this if you are worried. Half-Beta Prograne - (Propranolol) Beta-prograne and Half Beta-prograne prolonged-release capsules contain the active ingredient propranolol hydrochloride, which is a type of medicine called a beta-blocker. Propranolol is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Herceptin Herceptin (Trastuzumab) is only used to treat cancers that are HER2 positive. It can also be used in meta-static gastric cancer. Hibiscus Hibiscus (Hibiscus spp.) has been used for centuries by Ayurvedic (Hindu) and Chinese medical practitioners. Human studies have shown that extracts of hibiscus may lower systolic and diastolic pressure. In one study, hibiscus standardized extract worked as well as..... Hormone Therapy Hormone therapy as a cancer treatment may involve taking medications that interfere with the activity of the hormone or stop the production of the hormones. Hormone therapy may involve surgically removing a gland that is producing the the hormones. Humalog (insulin lispro) Kwickpen Humalog KwikPen prefilled pens contain insulin lispro. They are used to treat diabetes. Humira Injection Humira is intended for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, Crohn’s disease, and psoriasis. It is a medicine that decreases the infl ammation process of these diseases. Humulin M3 Humulin M3 cartridges, Humulin M3 vials and Humulin M3 KwikPen pre-filled pens all contain biphasic isophane insulin. They are used to treat diabetes. Huperzine A Huperzine A acts as a cholinesterase inhibitor — a group of medications that work by improving the levels of neurotransmitters in the brain. Small early studies suggest that huperzine A may improve memory and protect nerve cells, which could slow the cognitive decline associated with Alzheimer's. Hydrea (hydroxycarbamide) Capsules Hydrea capsules contain the active ingredient hydroxycarbamide.&nbsp; Hydrocortisyl Cream Hydrocortisyl (hydrocortisone) is a medicine which is used in dermatitis, eczema and inflammatory skin conditions. Hydroxocobalamin Injection Hydroxocobalamin is an injectable form of vitamin B12 that is given when there are problems with absorption of this vitamin from the gut. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin