Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Diprosalic Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Diprosalic Ointment You are here: Home Diprosalic Ointment Diprosalic ointment contains two active ingredients, betamethasone dipropionate and salicylic acid.&nbsp; What is Diprosalic ointment used for? Diprosalic ointment is prescribed to treat inflammatory and scaly skin disorders, such as eczema and psoriasis. It softens the scaly top layer of skin and reduces the redness and itching. How does Diprosalic ointment work? Diprosalic ointment contains two active ingredients, betamethasone dipropionate and salicylic acid. Betamethasone is a type of medicine called a topical corticosteroid. It works by stopping skin cells releasing various inflammatory substances that make blood vessels widen and cause the skin to become red, swollen and itchy. It reduces the swelling, redness and itching and so helps prevent scratching that can further irritate the skin. Salicylic acid is type of medicine called a keratolytic. It works by breaking down keratin, which is a protein that forms part of the skin structure. In psoriasis and chronic eczema, excessive amounts of keratin in the skin cells makes the skin become thickened and scaly. This can make it difficult for topical corticosteroids to penetrate through the skin and treat the inflammation. Salicylic acid breaks down the keratin in the hardened and thickened skin, helping to shed skin cells from the area to which it is applied, and soften and improve the appearance of scaly skin. It also helps improve the penetration of the betamethasone into the skin, making it more effective than if the betamethasone was applied on its own. Who shouldn't use Diprosalic ointment? Diprosalic ointment can be used by most adults and children. However, it you're using it on a child make sure you follow your doctor's instructions to the letter because children can be more susceptible to possible side effects. Only use Diprosalic to treat the skin condition you have shown your doctor. Don't use it if you know you're allergic to any of it's ingredients and don't use it on areas of skin affected by: Bacterial skin infections, such as impetigo. Fungal skin infections such as thrush, ringworm, athlete's foot. Viral skin infections, such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores or herpes simplex. Lesions caused by tuberculosis . Acne (spots). Acne rosacea. A skin condition called perioral dermatitis, which is a red spotty rash around the mouth. Nappy rash. Widespread plaque psoriasis. If you have psoriasis, your doctor may want you to have regular check-ups while using Diprosalic. See your doctor if your psoriasis gets worse or you get raised bumps filled with pus under your skin. Can I use Diprosalic ointment while pregnant or breastfeeding? Only if your doctor thinks it's essential. If your doctor says you can use Diprosalic ointment while pregnant or breastfeeding you should not use it on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. This will minimise any absorption of the steroid. If you need to apply the ointment to your breasts don't do this shortly before giving a feed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for further information. How do I use Diprosalic ointment? Diprosalic ointment should be applied thinly to the affected areas of skin, once or twice a day as directed by your doctor. See below for how much to use. Don't use the ointment on your face unless instructed to by your doctor. Don't apply it to broken skin or the genitals and take care to avoid getting the ointment in your eyes, nose or mouth. Rinse it off with water if you accidentally get the ointment in these areas. Wash your hands thoroughly after applying Diprosalic, unless the hands are the area being treated. Don't cover the treated area with dressings (this includes bandages, plasters, nappies and waterproof pants). You should continue using Diprosalic for as long as your doctor has recommended. However, if you're using it on a child, it should preferably not be used for more than five days at a time. Always follow the instructions given by your doctor. If your skin condition has not improved after two weeks of treatment you should see your doctor. Don't use Diprosalic more often or for longer than advised by your doctor. If you think the area of skin you are treating has become infected you should stop using Diprosalic and consult your doctor. What are the side effects of Diprosalic ointment? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that may be associated with Diprosalic ointment - these are rare when the ointment is used as directed. Just because a side effect is stated here doesn't mean that all people using this ointment will experience that or any side effect. Skin irritation, eg redness, rash, itching or burning sensation after applying the ointment. Allergic inflammation of the skin (contact dermatitis). Stop using Diprosalic and see your doctor if you think you've experienced a reaction or your skin condition appears to be getting worse. Drying of the skin. Stop using Diprosalic and consult your doctor if it's making your skin very dry or or irritated. Thinning of the skin. Reduced skin pigmentation. Stretch marks. Fine blood vessels becoming prominent under the skin. Excessive hair growth. Side effects are more likely if you apply excessive amounts of Diprosalic, and if you use it more than twice a day, for longer than two weeks, underneath dressings, on broken or raw skin, on delicate areas of skin like the face, or on areas of skin that rub together like armpits or skin folds. Children are more susceptible to side effects from using the ointment in this way. On rare occasions enough corticosteroid may be absorbed to have side effects on other parts of the body, for example a decrease in the production of natural hormones by the adrenal glands or Cushing's syndrome. If you experience any changes in your vision while using Diprosalic, such as blurred vision, you should tell your doctor. Read the leaflet that comes with the ointment, or talk to your pharmacist or doctor if you want any more information about the possible side effects of Diprosalic ointment.&nbsp; Can I use other medicines with Diprosalic ointment? Make sure your doctor or pharmacist know if you're already using any other medicines, particularly if you're already using any other corticosteroid medicines (including those bought without a prescription) before you start using Diprosalic. If you need to use other topical medicines on the same area of skin it's recommended that you leave several minutes between applying each product. This is to allow each product time to be absorbed and avoid them mixing on the skin. If you also use a moisturiser it's best to apply it about 30 minutes before applying Diprosalic. This will help soften the skin and improve the absorption of the ointment. If you apply a moisturiser just before or after applying Diprosalic this can dilute the corticosteroid and potentially make it less effective. References: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7152080 https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a6589/diprosalic-ointment-betamethasone-salicylic-acid/ https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8422/diprosalic-scalp-application-betamethasone-salicylic-acid/ https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1450/pil https://chealth.canoe.com/drug/getdrug/diprosalic https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2141458.PA1286_029_002.3a4049fa-53f3-4f18-a9a3-c2a8e6383c64.000001Product%20Leaflet%20Approved.pdf.140219.pdfhttp://www.papaa.org/combination-therapies/diprosalic &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Psoriasis , Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) , Eczema Print This Page Health Reference Psoriasis Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Eczema Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin