Nickel allergy | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Nickel allergy You are here: Home Nickel allergy Nickel allergy is one of the most common causes of allergic contact dermatitis — an itchy rash that appears when your skin touches a normally harmless substance. What is it? Nickel allergy is one of the most common causes of allergic contact dermatitis — an itchy rash that appears when your skin touches a normally harmless substance. Nickel allergy is commonly associated with earrings and jewelry for other body piercings. But nickel can be found in many everyday items — from coins to necklace clasps, from watchbands to eyeglass frames. Nickel allergy can affect people of all ages. You may develop nickel allergy after a single exposure to nickel or after repeated or prolonged exposure. Treatments can reduce the symptoms of nickel allergy. Once you develop nickel allergy, however, you will always be sensitive to the metal and should avoid contact. Symptoms If you have nickel allergy, an allergic reaction usually begins within 12 to 48 hours after exposure to a nickel-containing item and may persist for two to four weeks. The features of contact dermatitis usually appear only where your skin came into contact with nickel, but they may appear elsewhere on your body. Signs and symptoms of contact dermatitis caused by a nickel allergy include: Rash or bumps on the skin Itching, which may be severe Redness or changes in skin colour Dry patches of skin that may resemble a burn Blisters and draining fluid in severe cases Sweating at the point of contact with nickel may worsen the symptoms. Causes An allergic reaction is somewhat like a case of mistaken identity within your body's immune system. Normally, your immune system reacts to protect your body against bacteria, viruses or toxic substances. If you have nickel allergy, your body reacts to nickel. In other words, it's mistakenly identified nickel as something that could harm you. Once your body has developed a reaction to a particular agent (allergen) — in this case, nickel — your immune system will always be sensitive to it. When you come into contact with nickel, your immune system responds and produces an inflammatory response. Your immune system's sensitivity to nickel may develop after your first exposure or after repeated or prolonged exposure. The cause of nickel allergy is unknown, but sensitivity to nickel may, in part, be inherited (genetic). Sources of nickel exposure&nbsp; Nickel allergy is most commonly associated with earrings and other jewelry for body piercings that contain some nickel. Common sources of nickel exposure include: Jewelry for body piercings Other jewelry, including rings, bracelets, necklaces and jewelry clasps Watchbands Clothing fasteners, such as zippers, snaps and bra hooks Belt buckles Suspender clips Hairpins Eyeglass frames Coins Kitchen utensils Paper clips Pens Keys Tools, such as hammers and screwdrivers Risk factors Because nickel is common in jewelry, nickel allergy is most often associated with earrings and other body-piercing jewelry that contain nickel. If the first jewelry you wear after a piercing contains nickel, your body is constantly exposed to the metal during the healing time. And most people who have piercings wear jewelry every day. People who have regular exposure to nickel on the tops of their hands, feet or abdomen while doing "wet work" — as a result of either sweat or frequent contact with water — may be more likely to develop nickel allergy. This may include, for example, bartenders or people who work in certain food industries. If other people in your family are sensitive to nickel, then you may have a greater risk of developing nickel allergy. Diagnosis Your doctor can usually diagnose nickel allergy based on your skin's appearance and your recent history of contact with items likely to contain nickel. If the cause of your rash isn't apparent, however, your doctor may recommend a patch test (contact hypersensitivity allergy test). He or she may refer you to an allergy specialist (allergist) or skin specialists (dermatologist) for this test. During a patch test, very small quantities of potential allergens (including nickel) are applied to small patches, which are then placed on your skin to check for a reaction. The patches remain on your skin for two days before being evaluated by your doctor. If you have a nickel allergy, the skin under the nickel patch will be inflamed when the patch is removed or in the days after removal of the patch. Because of the low concentrations of allergens used, patch tests are safe even for people with severe allergies. References http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/nickel-allergy/basics/definition/con-20027616 http://www.healthline.com/health/allergies/nickel http://www.webmd.com/allergies/guide/nickel-jewelry-allergy https://www.allergyuk.org/skin-allergy/nickel-allergy Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Clarityn allergy tablets (Loratadine) Medicine Reference Loratadine Tablets Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin