Eldepryl, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Eldepryl You are here: Home Eldepryl Eldepryl (Selegeline) is used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Eldepryl may be taken alone in the early stages of your condition, delaying the need for the addition of other medicines. Why have I been prescribed Eldepryl? Eldepryl (Selegeline) is used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease . Eldepryl may be taken alone in the early stages of your condition, delaying the need for the addition of other medicines. Eldepryl however can also be used in conjunction with other treatments such as levodopa to reduce the on-off symptoms or uncontrolled movements you may experience. This happens especially when the effects of the other treatments are wearing-off. How does it work? People with Parkinson’s do not have enough of a chemical called dopamine in the brain. Eldepryl prevents the breakdown of dopamine therby increasing the amount available to the brain. When and how do I take it? Eldepryl can be taken as a single daily dose in the morning , or the prescribed daily dose taken in two parts, half dose in the morning and halfdose at lunchtime. If you take your tablets in the evening or before going to bed they may keep you awake at night. Your doctor will tell you how long you should continue to take this medicine. It can be taken with food and drink . What’s the dose? Your doctor will normally start you on a dose of 10mg Eldepryl each day. Could it interact with other tablets? Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. In particular it is important that you tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following: Dopamine Oral contraceptives (The ‘pill’, other forms of contraception should be discussed with you doctor). Another drug used for Parkinson ’s disease called levodopa. Pethidine can not be taken with Eldepryl. Taking Eldepryl with antidepressants: If you are taking any of the following antidepressants it is important to tell your doctor: Other monoamine oxidase inhibitors, including: phenelzine (Nardil® ), tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid or tramadol (Zydol® ), moclobemide (Manerix® ) Tricyclic antidepressants, including: amitryptaline, protryptaline, clomipramine, dothiepin, Iofepramine Fluoxetine (Prozac® ) Serotonin Specific Reuptake Inhibitors, including: fluvoxamine (Faverin®), sertraline (Lustral®), paroxetine (Seroxat®), citalopram (Cipramil, Ciprager) Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors, including: Venlafaxine (Efexor®) Your doctor may recommend that you stop taking the antidepressant 2 weeks before taking Eldepryl. In addition, your doctor may recommend that you avoid certain foods, such as mature cheese, broad beans, Bovril, yeast extracts or fermented soya bean products. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Eldepryl can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Common (affecting more than 1 person in 100, but less than 1 in 10): Dry mouth. Sleep Disturbances, confusion, experiencing situations, visions or sounds, which are not real (hallucinations). Rare (affecting more than I person in 10,000 but less than 1 in 1,000): Skin reactions or irritation. Difficulty passing urine. Very rare (affecting less than 1 person in 10,000): being excessively interested or involved in sexual activity If the effects persist, or are causing you a lot of discomfort talk with your doctor. When Eldepryl is taken with levodopa this may increase the side-effects of levodopa such as: confusion, hallucinations, insomnia , agitation a feeling of sickness headache feeling your heartbeat (palpitations) low blood pressure leading to a feeling of light-headedness, particularly when standing up excessive, uncontrollable movements after taking your medicine. These effects will usually stop when the amount of levodopa you are taking is reduced. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Eldepryl Always ask your pharmacist/doctor however as other tablets you are taking may have a bearing on whether you can drink alcohol or not. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You should not take Eldepryl if you are pregnant , planning to become pregnant or if you think you may be pregnant. You should not take Eldepryl if you are breast-feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=106429ad-859a-4b29-babf-42cb85f7236e http://www.drugs.com/eldepryl.html https://www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/medicine/13200/SPC/Eldepryl+tablets+5mg/ http://www.medicinenet.com/selegiline-oral/article.htm http://www.rxlist.com/eldepryl-drug.htm &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Parkinson&#039;s disease Print This Page Health Reference Parkinson&#039;s disease Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin