Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Lacri-Lube Lamictal Chewable/... Lamisil (Terbinafi... Lamisil Cream Lamotrigine Tablet... Lanoxin - (Digoxin... Lansoprazole Lantus SoloStar pe... Lanziop - (Lansopr... Lanzol - Lansopraz... Largactil (chlorpr... Lasix (Furosemide) Laxose Lercanidipine Tabl... Lercaril Tablet Lescol Letrozole Tablets Levemir FlexPen/Pe... Levitra - (Vardena... Levocetirizine Tab... Levonelle one step Lexapro Tablets Lexotan (Bromazepa... Librium Capsules Lioresal (Baclofen... Lipantil Micro Lipantil Supra Lipitor - Atorvast... Lipostat Liquivisc Lisopress - (Lisin... Lispril - (Lisinop... Livial Tablets Lixiana (Edoxaban... Loavel - (Ramipril... Locabiotal Nasal S... Loceryl Nail Lacqu... Locoid Cream/Ointm... Logynon Tablets Lonquex (Lipegfilg... Lopraz - (Omeprazo... Lorat - (Loratadin... Loratadine Tablets Lorazepam Losamel - (Omepraz... Losartan Losec - (Omeprazol... Losepine - (Omepra... Lotriderm Cream Lumigan (Bimatopro... Lustral Tablets Lyclear Cream Lyrica - (Pregabal... Medicine - L Lacri-Lube Lacri-lube eye ointment contains white soft paraffin, liquid paraffin (also known as mineral oil) and lanolin alcohols (also known as wool alcohols). These ingredients produce a transparent, lubricating and moistening film on the surface of the eyeball. Lamictal Chewable/ Dispersible Tablets Lamictal belongs to a group of medicines called anti-epileptics. It is used to treat two conditions — epilepsy and bipolar disorder. Lamisil (Terbinafine) Tablets Terbinafine is an antifungal medicine prescribed for hard to treat fungal skin and nail infections. Lamisil Cream Lamisil cream contains the active ingredient terbinafine hydrochloride, which is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections caused by fungi. Lamotrigine Tablets Lamictal belongs to a group of medicines called anti-epileptics. It is used to treat two conditions — epilepsy and bipolar disorder. Lanoxin - (Digoxin) Lanoxin (Digoxin) is a medicine which is used in heart failure and heart rhythm disorders. Lansoprazole Lansoprazole stop cells in the lining of the stomach from producing too much acid. This can help prevent ulcers from forming or assist the healing process. By decreasing the amount of acid, they can also help to reduce acid reflux related symptoms such as heartburn. Lantus SoloStar pens/cartridges Lantus vials, Lantus SoloStar pre-filled pens and Lantus penfill cartridges contain the active ingredient insulin glargine. They are used to treat diabetes. Lanziop - (Lansoprazole) Lanziop stop cells in the lining of the stomach from producing too much acid. This can help prevent ulcers from forming or assist the healing process. By decreasing the amount of acid, they can also help to reduce acid reflux related symptoms such as heartburn. Lanzol - Lansoprazole Lanzol stop cells in the lining of the stomach from producing too much acid. This can help prevent ulcers from forming or assist the healing process. By decreasing the amount of acid, they can also help to reduce acid reflux related symptoms such as heartburn. Largactil (chlorpromazine) Tablets Largactil (Chlorpromazine) is a type of medicine called a phenothiazine antipsychotic. It is used in the treatment of various psychiatric illnesses and is also used in the management of nausea and vomiting associated with terminal illness. Lasix (Furosemide) Furosemide is strong diuretic medicine (sometimes called a 'water tablet') that is used to remove excess fluid from the body in conditions such as heart failure. Laxose This laxative medicine can be bought from pharmacies to treat constipation or may be prescribed by a doctor to treat a complication of liver disease. Lercanidipine Tablets Zanidip tablets contain the active ingredient lercanidipine hydrochloride, which is a type of medicine called a calcium channel blocker. Lercaril Tablet Lercaril is a fixed combination of an ACE-inhibitor (enalapril) and a calcium channel blocker (lercanidipine), two medicines that lower blood pressure. Lercaril is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) in adult patients whose blood pressure is not adequately controlled by enalapril 20 mg alone. Lercaril should not be used for initial treatment of hypertension. Lescol Sometimes diet and life style changes alone will not be completely successful in lowerin 'bad cholesterol' and triglycerides, and elevating 'good cholesterol'. Your doctor will therefore prescribe additionsl treatment such as Lescol. Letrozole Tablets Letrozole is a drug&nbsp;used to treat breast cancer in post-menopausal women. It is a type of hormone treatment known as an aromatase inhibitor. Levemir FlexPen/Penfill Levemir is indicated for treatment of diabetes mellitus in adults, adolescents and children aged 1 year and above. Levitra - (Vardenafil) Levitra works by preventing the action of a chemical in the body called phosphodiesterase type 5. This helps to relax (widen) blood vessels and improves the flow of blood. Levocetirizine Tablets Levocetirizine Tablets is an antihistamine that reduces the effects of natural chemical histamine in the body. Histamine can produce symptoms of sneezing, itching, watery eyes, and runny nose. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin