Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Epiduo Gel Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Epiduo gel You are here: Home Epiduo gel Epiduo®&nbsp; (adapalene and benzoyl peroxide) Gel, 0.1%/2.5% is an alternative for those who suffer from mild to moderate acne and can be used for patients as young as 9-years-old. Epiduo Gel is the only antibiotic-free topical acne treatment with a fixed dose combination of 0.1% adapalene and 2.5% benzoyl peroxide. It helps clear up the breakouts you have now and helps prevent future pimples from forming. It also comes in a convenient pump, so treating breakouts can quickly become a part of your everyday routine. What is Epiduo gel used for? Epiduo gel is a treatment for mild to moderate acne. How does Epiduo gel work? Epiduo gel contains two active ingredients, adapalene 0.1% and benzoyl peroxide 2.5%. Adapalene is a retinoid medicine that increases the turnover of skin cells. Benzoyl peroxide is a keratolytic that breaks down keratin, a protein that forms part of the skin structure. Both these ingredients increase the natural exfoliation of the surface layer of skin and help to unblock the pores and sebaceous glands (the glands that produce sebum, the skin's natural oil), allowing the sebum to escape. They reduce the formation of blackheads and spots. Adapalene also has an anti-inflammatory effect, reducing redness and swelling in the skin, while benzoyl peroxide also kills the bacteria associated with causing acne, Propionebacterium acnes. This common type of bacteria feeds on sebum and produces waste products and fatty acids that irritate the sebaceous glands, making them inflamed and causing spots. Benzoyl peroxide reduces the number of these bacteria on the skin. How long does it take for Epiduo to work? Although it starts to work straight away and some people start to see results after a couple of weeks, most people will need to use Epiduo for at least a couple of months before their acne improves. Who shouldn't use Epiduo gel? Epiduo can be used by most people. However, it's not suitable if you have severe acne affecting large areas of skin, or for: Children under 9 years of age. Women who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant. Epiduo may be harmful to a developing baby so you should use effective contraception to avoid getting pregnant while using it. Stop using Epiduo if you think you could be pregnant. People who are allergic to any of the ingredients. Can I use Epiduo while breastfeeding? Epiduo can be used by women who are breastfeeding, as long as your doctor agrees. However, avoid applying it to your chest so your baby doesn't come into contact with it. How do I use Epiduo gel? Epiduo gel should be applied thinly once a day before going to bed. Clean and dry the skin thoroughly before applying Epiduo. Use a mild cleanser and pat rather than rub the skin dry. Using clean fingertips, apply enough Epiduo to thinly cover the area affected by acne (for example your whole face, not just individual spots or blackheads). Then wash your hands. Don't apply Epiduo to broken, sunburnt or sensitive areas of skin, or skin affected by eczema. Also take care to avoid getting it on your eyelids or lips, or in your eyes, nose or mouth. If you accidentally get the gel on these areas, wash it off with warm water. If you want to apply moisturisers or cosmetics, wait until the Epiduo has been absorbed into your skin. Don't apply Epiduo more than once a day; this won't make it any more effective or work any quicker. It may also make your skin very red, irritated or scaly. What are the side effects of Epiduo gel? Common side effects Burning sensation. Skin irritation. Redness of skin. Dry or peeling skin. Contact dermatitis. These tend to improve after two to four weeks as your skin gets used to the treatment. You can use a non-oily moisturiser to help with any dryness. If your skin gets very irritated try applying Epiduo less frequently, or stop using it temporarily. If the irritation is more severe or doesn't get better you should stop using Epiduo completely and consult your doctor. Uncommon side effects Itching. Sunburn. Read the leaflet that comes with the medicine or talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you want any more information about the possible side effects of Epiduo.&nbsp; Can I use Epiduo gel with other medicines? Don't use other retinoids or products containing benzoyl peroxide while you're using Epiduo gel. It's best to avoid using peeling agents like salicylic acid or glycolic acid, abrasive cleansers, strong drying agents or acne products containing alcohol or astringents while you're using Epiduo, as these are likely to have an additive drying or irritant effect on the skin. References: https://www.empr.com/drug/epiduo-gel/ https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a8754/epiduo-gel-adapalene-benzoyl-peroxide/ https://www.epiduoforte.com/about-epiduo https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-151655/epiduo-topical/details https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/451/smpc https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/451/pil https://www.verywellhealth.com/information-on-epiduo-acne-treatment-15878 https://www.rxlist.com/epiduo-side-effects-drug-center.htm &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Acne Print This Page Health Reference Acne Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin