Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Dalacin T Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dalacin T Lotion You are here: Home Dalacin T Lotion Dalacin T is an antibiotic available as a solution or lotion that you apply to the skin to treat acne (spots). What is Dalacin T? Dalacin T is an antibiotic available as a solution or lotion that you apply to the skin to treat acne (spots). How does Dalacin T work? Dalacin T topical solution and lotion both contain the antibiotic clindamycin phosphate. Clindamycin works by attacking the bacteria associated with acne, Propionibacterium acnes. This common type of bacteria feeds on the sebum produced by the sebaceous glands in the skin. It produces waste products and fatty acids that irritate the sebaceous glands, making them inflamed and causing spots. By controlling bacterial numbers, clindamycin brings the inflammation of the sebaceous glands under control, and allows the skin to heal. How long does Dalacin T take to work? Most people will need to use Dalacin T for at least two months before their acne starts to improve, so it's important to be patient and keep using it every day. Key facts about Dalacin T Dalacin T is only available on prescription. Dalacin T is suitable for adults and children. You can use Dalacin T on your face, back or chest. Dalacin T should be applied twice a day over the whole area where you get acne. Common side effects include skin itching, irritation or dryness. Dalacin T topical solution contains alcohol, which is flammable. Do not apply it near naked flames or while smoking. Tell your doctor straight away if you get severe, persistent or bloody diarrhoea while using Dalacin T. Who shouldn't use Dalacin T? Dalacin T is not suitable for: People with a history of inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. People with a history of bowel inflammation caused by antibiotic treatment (antibiotic-associated colitis). People who are allergic to clindamycin or the related antibiotic lincomycin. People who are allergic to any ingredients of the lotion or solution. Can I use Dalacin T while pregnant or breastfeeding? If you are pregnant or breastfeeding make sure your doctor knows before you start using Dalacin T. Clindamycin is not known to be harmful if used during pregnancy, but Dalacin T will only be prescribed if your doctor thinks it is essential. Dalacin T is not expected to be harmful to a breastfed baby, but should only be used if your doctor agrees. If you do use it while breastfeeding, avoid applying it to your chest so your baby doesn't come into contact with it and consult your doctor straight away if your child develops diarrhoea or shows any sign of illness. How do I use Dalacin T? Dalacin T topical solution or lotion should be applied thinly to the whole area of skin affected by acne (not just the individual spots) twice a day, morning and evening. Wash your skin with a mild cleanser and pat it dry before applying Dalacin T. Dalacin T solution has an automatic pad dispenser on the bottle. Gently dab the pad onto your skin to apply the solution. Dalacin T lotion should be gently rubbed into your skin using your fingertips or a cotton pad. Wash your hands after application. Don't apply Dalacin T to broken, sunburnt or sensitive areas of skin and take care to avoid getting it on your eyelids or lips, or in your eyes, nose or mouth. If you accidentally get Dalacin T on these areas, wash it off with cool water. You can use moisturisers or cosmetics after applying Dalacin T, but wait until it has dried. Keep applying Dalacin T twice a day for as long as your doctor prescribes - this may be for several months. What are the side effects of Dalacin T? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that may be associated with Dalacin T. Just because a side effect is stated here doesn't mean that all people using this acne treatment will experience that or any side effect. Very common side effects (affect more than 1 in 10 people ) Dryness and irritation of the skin at the application site. Nettle-type rash (hives). Common side effects (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Skin oiliness. Other possible side effects Contact dermatitis. Inflammation of the bowel (colitis). Although this is very unlikely to occur when you use the antibiotic on the skin, if you get diarrhoea either during or after using Dalacin T, particularly if it becomes severe or persistent, or contains blood or mucus, you should stop using Dalacin T and see your doctor straight away. Read the leaflet that comes with the medicine or talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you want any more information about the possible side effects of Dalacin T.&nbsp; Can I use Dalacin T with other medicines? Check with your pharmacist or doctor before using other medicines on your skin (including those bought without a prescription) while you are using Dalacin T. As Dalacin T topical solution contains alcohol it shouldn't be used at the same time as acne treatments that contain benzoyl peroxide, as they are likely to have an additive drying or irritant effect on the skin. If you find Dalacin T dries or irritates your skin, then using other skin preparations such as medicated cosmetics, soaps, cleansers, toiletries and other anti-acne preparations, particularly those containing high concentrations of alcohol or astringents, is likely to make this worse. The Propionibacterium is becoming more resistant to antibiotics. To help avoid the development of resistance, your doctor should avoid prescribing different antibiotics for you to take by mouth while you are using Dalacin T on your skin. References: https://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-hair/a6507/dalacin-t-topical-solution-and-lotion-clindamycin/ http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/spcpil/documents/spcpil/con1474608897988.pdf https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/1080/smpc https://netdoktor.dk/sygdomme/fakta/bakterielvaginose.htm &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Acne Print This Page Health Reference Acne Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin