Caneston HC Cream, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Canesten HC cream You are here: Home Canesten HC cream Canesten HC cream contains two active ingredients, clotrimazole and hydrocortisone. Clotrimazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Hydrocortisone is a corticosteroid medicine that is applied to the skin to relieve the symptoms of inflammation. What is it used for? Skin infections caused by yeasts (eg Candida), dermatophytes (eg Trichophyton, Tinea), moulds and other fungi, such as those listed below, when rapid relief from inflammation and itching is also needed: Athlete's foot (tinea pedis). Fungal infection of the groin, ie jock itch (tinea cruris). Ringworm (tinea corporis). Fungal nappy rash caused by infection with Candida albicans. Sweat rash caused by infection with Candida albicans. Relieving the external symptoms (candidal vulvitis) of vaginal thrush (candidal vaginitis). Inflammation of the penis and/or foreskin (candidal balanitis) caused by infection with Candida albicans (also known as thrush). How does it work? Canesten HC cream contains two active ingredients, clotrimazole and hydrocortisone. Clotrimazole is an antifungal medicine used to treat infections with fungi and yeasts. Hydrocortisone is a corticosteroid medicine that is applied to the skin to relieve the symptoms of inflammation. Clotrimazole kills fungi and yeasts by interfering with their cell membranes. It works by stopping the fungi from producing a substance called ergosterol, which is an essential component of fungal cell membranes. The disruption in production of ergosterol causes holes to appear in the fungal cell membrane. The cell membranes of fungi are vital for their survival. They keep unwanted substances from entering the cells and stop the contents of the cells from leaking out. As clotrimazole causes holes to appear in the cell membranes, essential constituents of the fungal cells can leak out. This kills the fungi and treats the infection. Clotrimazole cream is used to treat a wide range of skin infections caused by fungi. These include infections with dermatophytes such as tinea, eg ringworm (tinea corporis), athlete's foot (tinea pedis), and jock itch (tinea cruris) and infections with yeasts such as candida, eg fungal nappy rash, sweat rash, or thrush affecting the outside of the vagina (vulva and labia) or the end of the penis. Hydrocortisone reduces skin inflammation by stopping skin cells from producing various inflammation-causing chemicals that are normally released when the skin reacts to irritation. These inflammation-causing chemicals include prostaglandins and various other inflammatory substances. They cause blood vessels to widen and other inflammatory substances to arrive, resulting in the affected area of skin becoming red, swollen and itchy. By preventing these inflammatory chemicals from being released in the skin, hydrocortisone reduces inflammation and relieves its related symptoms such as redness and itchiness. The combination of medicines in Canesten HC cream is used to treat fungal skin infections when rapid relief from the symptoms of inflammation, such as itching, is also needed. How do I use it? Canesten HC cream should be applied thinly and evenly to the affected area(s) of skin twice daily and rubbed in gently. Wash your hands after applying the cream. Canesten HC cream should be used for a maximum of seven days. If the infection is still present after this time treatment can be continued with steroid-free Canesten cream. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice. If you are using Canesten HC cream to treat athlete's foot you should make sure you wash and dry the feet, especially between the toes, before applying the cream. If you are using Canesten HC cream to treat vaginal thrush it will only relieve the external symptoms of the infection, such as itching, inflammation and soreness. It won't treat infection inside your vagina, and so should be used in combination with a thrush treatment that does, for example clotrimazole pessaries or cream that are inserted into the vagina, or an antifungal medicine taken by mouth. Your doctor or pharmacist can advise you about which products to use. Not to be used on areas of skin affected by: Untreated bacterial skin infections. Viral infections such as chickenpox, shingles, cold sores or herpes simplex. Vaccination reactions. Acne. Chronic inflammatory disorder of the facial skin ( acne rosacea ). Inflammatory rash around the mouth (perioral dermatitis). This medicine should not be used if you are allergic to one or any of its ingredients. Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you have previously experienced such an allergy . If you feel you have experienced an allergic reaction , stop using this medicine and inform your doctor or pharmacist immediately. Pregnancy and breastfeeding Certain medicines should not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding. However, other medicines may be safely used in pregnancy or breastfeeding providing the benefits to the mother outweigh the risks to the unborn baby. Always inform your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, before using any medicine. This medicine is not expected to be absorbed into the bloodstream in significant amounts with short-term use on small areas of skin. However, it should only be used during pregnancy if considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings, or for prolonged periods of time. Consult your doctor for further information. This medicine is not expected to be absorbed into the bloodstream or pass into breast milk in significant amounts with short-term use on small areas of skin. However, it should only be used during breastfeeding if considered essential by your doctor. If it is prescribed by your doctor it should not be used on large areas of skin, underneath airtight dressings or for prolonged periods of time. If it is applied to the breasts it should be washed off carefully before breastfeeding and then reapplied afterwards. Side effects Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here, it does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Irritation in area of use, for example burning, stinging, itching, redness, rash, blistering or peeling. Stop using the cream and consult your doctor or pharmacist if you have a severe reaction to it. If used for longer than two to four weeks, under airtight dressings or on large areas of skin (more than 10% of the body surface), the following side effects are also possible: Thinning of the skin. Decrease in skin pigmentation. Acne. Increased hair growth. Stretch marks. Groupings of fine blood vessels becoming prominent under the skin (telangiectasia). The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or pharmacist. References: https://www.drugs.com/uk/canesten-hc-cream-spc-2572.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/skin-and-hair/a6365/canesten-hc-cream/ http://www.medicines.ie/medicine/1080/SPC/Canesten+HC+Cream/ https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/2140038.PPA0465_246_001.235c2506-adb1-4304-99b0-15dc984ff063.000001pil.131125.pdf http://www.papaa.org/antifungals/canesten-hc &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Nappy Rash , Ringworm-body , Jock itch , Athletes Foot Print This Page More Videos... Nappy Rash Health Reference Nappy Rash Ringworm-body Jock itch Athletes Foot Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin