Kidney cysts | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Kidney cysts You are here: Home Kidney cysts Kidney cysts are round pouches of fluid that form in the kidneys. Kidney cysts can be associated with serious disorders that can impair kidney function. What is it? Kidney cysts are round pouches of fluid that form in the kidneys. Kidney cysts can be associated with serious disorders that can impair kidney function. But more commonly, kidney cysts are a type called simple kidney cysts — noncancerous cysts that rarely cause complications. It's not clear what causes simple kidney cysts. Simple kidney cysts typically occur as one cyst on the surface of a kidney. But simple kidney cysts can occur as multiple cysts affecting one or both kidneys. Simple kidney cysts are often detected during an imaging test being done for another condition. Simple kidney cysts that don't cause signs or symptoms usually don't require treatment. Symptoms Simple kidney cysts typically don't cause signs or symptoms. If a simple kidney cyst grows large enough, kidney cyst symptoms may include: Dull pain in your back or side Fever Upper abdominal pain Causes It's not clear what causes simple kidney cysts. Risk factors The risk of simple kidney cysts increases as you get older, though they can occur at any age. Complications Kidney cysts can occasionally cause complications, including: An infected cyst . A kidney cyst may become infected, causing fever and pain. A burst cyst. A kidney cyst that bursts causes severe pain in your back or side. Diagnosis Tests and procedures used to diagnose simple kidney cysts include: Imaging tests . Imaging tests, such as ultrasound, computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are often used to investigate simple kidney cysts. Imaging tests can help your doctor determine whether a kidney mass is a cyst or a tumor. Kidney function tests . Testing a sample of your blood may reveal whether a kidney cyst is impairing your kidney function. References http://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases_conditions/hic-catch-kidney-cancer-early-know-the-symptoms/hic-simple-kidney-cysts http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/453831-treatment http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-topics/kidney-disease/kidney-cysts/Pages/facts.aspx http://ndt.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/suppl_4/iv106.full Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin