Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Babyhaler Device Baclofen Tablets Bactroban Cream/Oi... Bactroban Nasal Baraclude (entecav... Barbiturates Beclazone Easi-Bre... Beclazone Inhaler Beconase Nasal Spr... Becotide Evohaler Bendroflumethiazid... Benepali 50 mg sol... Benetor Beta-Prograne - (P... Beta-sitosterol Betacap Scalp Appl... Betaferon Betaloc Betmiga - (mirabeg... Betnesol Drops Betnesol Soluble (... Betnesol-N Nose Dr... Betnovate Cream/Oi... Betnovate RD Cream... Betnovate Scalp Ap... Betoptic Bicalutamide Table... Binosto (alendrona... Biological Therapy Biozac - (Fluoxeti... Bisolvon Oral Solu... Bisop (Bisoprolol)... Bisopine Tablets Bisoprolol Tablets Bonviva Boswellia Bravelle injection Bricanyl (terbutal... Brilique tablets Brimica Genuair Brintellix Tablets... Brolene Brufen Retard Tabl... Brufen Syrup Brufen Tablets Buccolam-(midazola... Budenofalk Rectal... Bufomix Easyhaler Burinex Tablets (B... Buscopan - (Hyosci... Butterbur By-Madol capsules By-Mycin (Doxycycl... Byetta injection Bystat - (Pravasta... ByTrite - (Ramipri... Byzestra - (Lisino... Medicine - B Babyhaler Device A Babyhaler is a spacer device to help babies and small infants take inhaled medicines. It has a soft face mask which can be placed gently over the baby’s nose and mouth.&nbsp; Baclofen Tablets Baclofen tablets, syrup and intrathecal injections all contain the active ingredient baclofen, which is a muscle relaxant medicine. Bactroban Cream/Ointment Bactroban is a topical antibacterial agent, active against those organisms responsible for the majority of skin infections, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin-resistant strains, other staphylococci, streptococci. It is also active against Gram-negative organisms such as Escherichia coli and Haemophilus influenzae. Bactroban Ointment is used for skin infections, e.g. impetigo, folliculitis, furunculosis. Bactroban Nasal Bactroban nasal ointment contains the active ingredient mupirocin, which is an antibacterial medicine. It is used to eliminate staphylococcal bacteria from the nasal passages. In particular, it is usually reserved for eradicating methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteria from the nasal passages of hospital inpatients. Baraclude (entecavir) Entecavir is used to treat long-term hepatitis B infection. Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver caused by the hepatitis B virus. Long-term infection can cause liver damage, rarely liver cancer, and liver failure. Entecavir helps to decrease the amount of hepatitis B virus in your body. It is unknown if this medication lowers your chance of getting liver cancer or liver damage. Entecavir is an antiviral that belongs to a class of drugs known as hepatitis B virus nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Barbiturates Barbiturates are drugs that act as central nervous system depressants, and can therefore produce a wide spectrum of effects, from mild sedation to total anesthesia. They are also effective as anxiolytics, hypnotics, and anticonvulsants. Beclazone Easi-Breathe Inhaler Beclazone inhalers and Beclazone easi-breathe inhalers contain the active ingredient beclometasone dipropionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid. Beclazone Inhaler Beclazone inhalers and Beclazone easi-breathe inhalers contain the active ingredient beclometasone dipropionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid. Beconase Nasal Spray Beconase hayfever nasal spray contains the active ingredient beclometasone dipropionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid (or steroid). Corticosteroids are hormones that are produced naturally by the adrenal glands and have many important functions, including control of inflammatory responses. Becotide Evohaler Becotide inhalers contain the active ingredient beclometasone dipropionate, which is a type of medicine known as a corticosteroid. (NB. Beclometasone inhalers are also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine.) Bendroflumethiazide Bendroflumethiazide is a thiazide diuretic which works by inhibiting sodium absorption at the beginning of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). Water is lost as a result of more sodium reaching the collecting ducts. Benepali 50 mg solution for injection Benepali is a brand name os the chemical Etanercept. Other brands, such as Enbrel are also available in Ireland. Etanercept is a type of drug known as a biological therapy. In rheumatoid arthritis and some other inflammatory conditions, too much of a protein called TNF is produced by the immune system. This causes inflammation, pain and damage to your joints. Anti-TNF drugs, such as etanercept, block TNF and reduce inflammation. &nbsp; Benetor Benetor (Olmesartan) is used to treat hypertension (high blood pressure). Beta-Prograne - (Propranolol) Beta-prograne and Half Beta-prograne prolonged-release capsules contain the active ingredient propranolol hydrochloride, which is a type of medicine called a beta-blocker. Propranolol is also available without a brand name, ie as the generic medicine. Beta-sitosterol Beta-sitosterol is one of the most common dietary phytosterols (plant sterols) found and synthesized exclusively by plants such as in fruits, vegetables, soybeans, breads, peanuts and peanut products. Betacap Scalp Application Betacap Scalp Application is for use on the scalp to treat skin diseases including psoriasis (scaly, pink patches of thickened skin) and seborrhoeic dermatitis (scaly, itchy patches of skin). Betaferon Betaferon (Interferon) is for use in patients: who have experienced symptoms for the first time which indicate a high risk of developing multiple sclerosis who suffer from relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis who suffer from secondary progressive multiple sclerosis Betaloc Betaloc (Metoprolol) is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension), gripping chest pain due to insufficient oxygen for the heart (angina pectoris), and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Betaloc can also be used with other drugs in the treatment of other conditions. Betmiga - (mirabegron) Betmiga prolonged-release tablets contain the active ingredient mirabegron, which is a type of medicine called a selective beta3 adrenoceptor agonist. It is used to treat the symptoms of an overactive bladder (OAB). Betnesol Drops Betnesol eye, ear and nose drops contain the active ingredient betamethasone, which belongs to a group of medicines known as corticosteroids. They are used for reducing inflammation. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin