Hyperthyroidism | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Hyperthyroidism You are here: Home Hyperthyroidism In this article I cover what Hyperthyroidism is, the risk factors and causes of Hyperthyroidism, the tests for Hyperthyroidism, the treatments and management of Hyperthyroidism. What is it? Hyperparathyroidism is an excess of parathyroid hormone in the bloodstream due to overactivity of one or more of the body's four parathyroid glands. These oval, grain-of-rice-sized glands are located in your neck. The parathyroid glands produce parathyroid hormone, which helps maintain an appropriate balance of calcium in the bloodstream and in tissues that depend on calcium for proper functioning. Two types of hyperparathyroidism exist. In primary hyperparathyroidism, an enlargement of one or more of the parathyroid glands causes overproduction of the hormone resulting in high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia), which can cause a variety of health problems. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is a result of another disease that causes low levels of calcium in the body. Surgery is the most common treatment for hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism is often diagnosed before signs or symptoms of the disorder are apparent. When symptoms do occur, they are the result of damage or dysfunction in other organs or tissues due to high calcium levels circulating in the blood or too little calcium in bones. Symptoms may be so mild and nonspecific that they don't seem at all related to parathyroid function, or they may be severe. The range of signs and symptoms include: Fragile bones that easily fracture (osteoporosis) Kidney stones Excessive urination Abdominal pain Tiring easily or weakness Depression or forgetfulness Bone and joint pain Frequent complaints of illness with no apparent cause Nausea, vomiting or loss of appetite Causes Hyperparathyroidism is caused by factors that increase the production of parathyroid hormone. The parathyroid glands maintain proper levels of both calcium and phosphorus in your body by turning the secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) off or on, much as a thermostat controls a heating system to maintain a constant air temperature. Vitamin D also is involved in regulating the amount of calcium in your blood. Normally, this balancing act works well. When calcium levels in your blood fall too low, your parathyroid glands secrete enough PTH to restore the balance. PTH raises calcium levels by releasing calcium from your bones and increasing the amount of calcium absorbed from your small intestine. When blood calcium levels are too high, the parathyroid glands produce less PTH. But sometimes one or more of these glands produce too much hormone, leading to abnormally high levels of calcium (hypercalcemia) and low levels of phosphorus in your blood. The mineral calcium is best known for its role in keeping your teeth and bones healthy. But calcium has other functions. It aids in the transmission of signals in nerve cells, and it's involved in muscle contraction. Phosphorus, another mineral, works in conjunction with calcium in these areas. The disorder can generally be divided into two types based on the cause. Hyperparathyroidism may occur because of a problem with the parathyroid glands themselves (primary hyperparathyroidism) or because of another disease that affects the glands' function (secondary hyperparathyroidism). Primary Hyperparathyroidism Primary hyperparathyroidism occurs because of some problem with one or more of the four parathyroid glands: A noncancerous growth (adenoma) on a gland is the most common cause. Enlargement (hyperplasia) of two or more parathyroid glands accounts for most other cases. A cancerous (malignant) tumor is a rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism. Primary hyperparathyroidism usually occurs randomly, but some people inherit a gene that causes the disorder. Secondary hyperparathyroidism Secondary hyperparathyroidism is the result of another condition that lowers calcium levels. Therefore, your parathyroid glands overwork to compensate for the loss of calcium. Factors that may contribute to secondary hyperparathyroidism include: Severe calcium deficiency . Your body may not get enough calcium from your diet, often because your digestive system doesn't absorb the calcium you consume. Severe vitamin D deficiency . Vitamin D helps maintain appropriate levels of calcium in the blood, and it helps your digestive system absorb calcium from your food. Your body produces vitamin D when your skin is exposed to sunlight, and you consume some vitamin D in food. If you don't get enough vitamin D, then calcium levels may drop. Chronic kidney failure . Your kidneys convert vitamin D into a form that your body can use. If your kidneys function poorly, useable vitamin D may decline and calcium levels drop. Chronic kidney failure is the most common cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Risk factors You may be at an increased risk of primary hyperparathyroidism if you: Are a woman who has gone through menopause Have had prolonged, severe calcium or vitamin D deficiency Have a rare, inherited disorder, such as multiple endocrine neoplasia, type I, which usually affects multiple glands Have had radiation treatmen t for cancer that has exposed your neck to radiation Have taken lithium, a drug most often used to treat bipolar disorder Blood tests If the result of a blood test indicates you have elevated calcium in your blood, your doctor will likely repeat the test to confirm the results after you have not eaten for a period of time (fasted). A number of conditions can raise calcium levels, but your doctor can make a diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism if blood tests show you also have elevated parathyroid hormone. Additional diagnostic tests After making a diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism, your doctor will likely order additional tests to rule out possible secondary causes, to identify possible complications and to judge the severity of the condition. These tests include: Bone mineral density test (bone densitometry) . The most common test to measure bone mineral density is dual energy X-ray absorptiometry, or a DXA scan. This test uses special X-ray devices to measure how many grams of calcium and other bone minerals are packed into a segment of bone. Urine tests . A 24-hour collection of urine can provide information on how well your kidneys function and how much calcium is excreted in your urine. This test may help in judging the severity of hyperparathyroidism or diagnosing a kidney disorder causing hyperparathyroidism. Imaging tests of kidneys . Your doctor may order X-rays or other imaging tests of your abdomen to determine if you have kidney stones or other kidney abnormalities. Imaging tests before surgery If your doctor recommends surgery, he or she will likely use a combination of two imaging tests to locate the parathyroid gland or glands that are causing problems: Ultrasound . Ultrasound uses sound waves to create images of your parathyroid glands and surrounding tissue. A small device held against your skin (transducer) emits high-pitched sound waves and records the sound wave echoes as they reflect off internal structures. A computer converts the echoes into images on a monitor. Sestamibi scan . Sestamibi is a specially designed radioactive compound that is absorbed by overactive parathyroid glands and can be detected on computerized tomography (CT) scans. A small dose of the compound is injected into your bloodstream before the imaging test is done.&nbsp; How do you treat it? Like any disease, even if there is no cure, there is almost always something you can do to&nbsp; manage &nbsp;it and take control. There are three main areas involved in the treatment of any disease: Conventional medicine Complementary medicine Complementary therapies For information on medicines &nbsp;and therapies &nbsp;relevant to Hyperthyroidism, make an appointment at Lynch's Pharmacy, Broadale , &nbsp;Douglas, Cork on 021-4366923. Learn all about the drugs &nbsp;used to treat Hyperthyroidism, and any complementary medicines &nbsp;or therapies &nbsp;proven to help. Equip yourself with the tools to manage the condition and not be managed by it. How do you live with it? Certain adjustments may be needed to get on with your life, and often, some simple tips and advice can go a long way to making these changes.&nbsp; When you come to a Lynch's Pharmacy Clinic,&nbsp;we give you all the necessary information available to make your life more manageable and allow you to better live with your condition. References: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperthyroidism http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/hyperthyroidism/DS00344 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000356.htm http://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/hyperthyroidism-topic-overview http://www.medicinenet.com/hyperthyroidism/article.htm Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Calcium Neo-Mercazole Tablets Propylthiouracil Vitamin D Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin