Cifloxager, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cifloxager - (Ciprofloxacin) You are here: Home Cifloxager - (Ciprofloxacin) Cifloxager tablets and suspension contain the active ingredient ciprofloxacin, which is a type of medicine called a quinolone antibiotic. Antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria. What is Cifloxager Cifloxager works by killing the&nbsp;bacteria&nbsp;that are causing an infection. It does this by entering the bacterial cells and inhibiting a bacterial enzyme called DNA-gyrase. This enzyme is involved in replicating and repairing the genetic material (DNA) of the bacteria. If this enzyme doesn't work, the&nbsp;bacteria&nbsp;cannot reproduce or repair themselves and this kills the&nbsp;bacteria. Cifloxager is effective against a large number of&nbsp;bacteria,&nbsp;some of which tend to be resistant to other commonly used&nbsp; antibiotics . It is particularly useful against a sub-group of bacteria called&nbsp;Gram-negative bacteria, including salmonella, shigella, campylobacter, neisseria, and pseudomonas. It is used to treat a wide range of infections, including&nbsp; infections of the chest ,&nbsp; urinary tract &nbsp;and of the gastrointestinal system. It is also used as a single dose treatment for gonorrhoea. To make sure the&nbsp;bacteria&nbsp;causing an infection are susceptible to Cifloxager your doctor may take a tissue sample, for example a swab from the throat or skin, or a urine or blood sample. What is Cifloxager used for? In adults, Cifloxager can be used to treat the infections below, when caused by susceptible bacteria. Bacterial infections of the&nbsp; lungs &nbsp;and airways (respiratory tract), such as&nbsp; pneumonia &nbsp;(but not 1st line treatment of&nbsp; pneumococcal pneumonia ), acute bronchitis , bronchiectasis and lung infections in&nbsp; cystic fibrosis &nbsp;or&nbsp; chronic bronchitis . Bacterial ear, nose and throat infections such as&nbsp; sinusitis , otitis media and otitis externa. Bacterial eye infections such as &nbsp;bacterial conjunctivitis . Bacterial infections of the&nbsp; urinary tract , such as&nbsp; cystitis ,&nbsp; kidney infections&nbsp; (pyelonephritis), urethritis. Bacterial infection of the prostate gland (prostatitis)&nbsp;or testicles (epididymitis). Bacterial infections of the skin and soft tissue, such as infected ulcers, wounds or burns, abscesses, cellulitis, erysipelas. Bacterial infections of bones and joints, such as osteomyelitis and septic&nbsp; arthritis . Abdominal bacterial infections, such as peritonitis or abdominal abscesses. Bacterial infections of the stomach and intestines, such as typhoid fever or infective&nbsp; diarrhoea . Bacterial infections of the biliary tract or gall bladder. Bacterial infections in the pelvis, such as pelvic inflammatory disease or infections in the uterus ( endometriosis ) or uterine tube (salpingitis). Gonorrhoea. Bacterial infection of the blood (septicaemia or blood poisoning). Preventing infections in people having stomach or intestinal surgery or endoscopic procedures, where there is an increased risk of infection. Preventing or treating anthrax affecting the lungs, following exposure to anthrax spores. Before taking Cifloxager Before taking Cifloxager make sure your doctor or&nbsp;pharmacist&nbsp;knows: If you are pregnant, trying for a baby or breast-feeding. If you have ever experienced tendon problems after taking any other quinolone antibiotic such as&nbsp; ofloxacin ,&nbsp; levofloxacin , moxifloxacin, nalidixic acid or norfloxacin. If you have&nbsp; kidney problems . If you have&nbsp; epilepsy&nbsp; or any other condition that causes fitting. If you have myasthenia gravis (a muscle weakening disease). If you know you have glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. If you are taking other medicines, including those available to buy without a prescription, herbal and complementary medicines. If you have ever had an&nbsp; allergic reaction &nbsp;to this or any other medicine. How do I take Cifloxager? The dose of this medicine and how long it needs to be taken for depends on your kidney function and the type of infection you have. Follow the instructions given by your doctor. These will be printed on the dispensing label that your&nbsp;pharmacist&nbsp;has put on the packet of medicine. Cifloxager is usually taken twice a day (every 12 hours). Cifloxager tablets should be swallowed whole and not chewed. Bottles of suspension should be shaken before measuring out a dose. Only use the measuring spoon provided with the suspension. You should not use a regular teaspoon or tablespoon to take the medicine, as this will not give an accurate dose. Cifloxager can be taken either with or without food. You should not take milk, yoghurt, antacids for indigestion or heartburn, or medicines containing&nbsp; calcium, &nbsp;iron, zinc, magnesium or aluminium at the same time as ciproxin. This is because these can reduce the absorption of the&nbsp; antibiotic &nbsp;from the gut.&nbsp; Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, it is important that you finish the prescribed course of this&nbsp; antibiotic&nbsp; medicine, even if you feel better or it seems the infection has cleared up. Stopping the course early increases the chance that the infection will come back and that the bacteria will grow resistant to the&nbsp; antibiotic . Side effects of Cifloxager Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. The following are some of the side effects that are known to be associated with this medicine. Just because a side effect is stated here does not mean that all people using this medicine will experience that or any side effect. Common (affect between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) Nausea. Diarrhoea. Uncommon (affect between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 people) Rash. Itching. Loss of appetite. Headache . Dizziness . Feeling weak or tired (asthenia). Sleep disturbances. Hyperactivity or agitation. Taste disturbances. Abdominal pain, flatulence (wind) or indigestion. Vomiting. Joint or back pain. Fungal infections. Rare (affect between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10,000 people) Disturbances in the numbers of blood cells in the blood. Increased blood sugar levels (hyperglycaemia). Confusion. Anxiety . Depression. &nbsp;Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any change in your mood, feelings or thoughts while taking this medicine. Hallucinations. Abnormal dreams. Tremor. Convulsions. Pins and needles, burning or numb sensations. Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any strange sensations while taking this medicine. Visual disturbances. Hearing problems, including tinnitus. Increased heart rate. Low blood pressure or fainting. Sweating. Shortness of breath. Muscle pain or cramps. Increased sensitivity of the skin to sunlight. Inflammation of the bowel lining. Liver or kidney disorders. Tell your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms while taking this medicine, as they may suggest a problem with your liver: rapidly feeling weak or unwell, unexplained itching, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes (jaundice) or unusually dark urine. Very rare (affect less than 1 in 10,000 people) Disturbances in smell. Tendon disorders (see warning section above). Psychotic reactions. Migraine . Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Severe allergic skin reactions. Consult your doctor immediately if you get a severe rash, skin peeling, or painful blisters in the mouth/nose or genitals while taking this medicine. The side effects listed above may not include all of the side effects reported by the medicine's manufacturer. For more information about any other possible risks associated with this medicine, please read the information provided with the medicine or consult your doctor or&nbsp;pharmacist. How to store Cifloxager Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. If you have any more questions please ask your&nbsp;Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: http://www.medsafe.govt.nz/consumers/cmi/c/Ciproxintab.pdf http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/Ciprofloxacin.htmhttp://www.netdoctor.co.uk/sex-and-relationships/medicines/ciproxin.html http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/sex-and-relationships/medicines/ciproxin.html http://xpil.medicines.org.uk/ViewPil.aspx?DocID=2857 http://www.virtualmedicalcentre.com/drugs/ciproxin/1918 http://www.drugs.com/uk/ciproxin-tablets-500mg-spc-8093.html http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ciprofloxacin Read More &gt; Health Reference : Kidney infection Print This Page More Videos... Cough Treatment Health Reference Kidney infection Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin