Laryngitis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Laryngitis You are here: Home Laryngitis Laryngitis is an inflammation of your voice box (larynx) from overuse, irritation or infection. What is it? Laryngitis is an inflammation of your voice box (larynx) from overuse, irritation or infection. Inside the larynx are your vocal cords — two folds of mucous membrane covering muscle and cartilage. Normally your vocal cords open and close smoothly, forming sounds through their movement and vibration. But in laryngitis, your vocal cords become inflamed or irritated. This swelling causes distortion of the sounds produced by air passing over them. As a result, your voice sounds hoarse. In some cases of laryngitis, your voice can become almost undetectable. Laryngitis may be short-lived (acute) or long lasting (chronic). Most cases of laryngitis are triggered by temporary viral infection or vocal strain and are not serious. Persistent hoarseness can sometimes signal a more serious underlying medical condition. Symptoms In most cases laryngitis symptoms last less than a couple of weeks and are caused by something minor, such as a cold. Less often, laryngitis symptoms are caused by something more serious or long lasting. Laryngitis signs and symptoms can include: Hoarseness Weak voice or voice loss Tickling sensation and rawness of your throat Sore throat Dry throat Dry cough Causes Acute laryngitis Most cases of laryngitis are temporary and improve after the underlying cause gets better. Causes of acute laryngitis include: Viral infections such as those that cause a&nbsp; cold Vocal strain, caused by yelling or overusing your voice Viruses such as measles or mumps Bacterial infections such as diphtheria, although this is rare Chronic laryngitis Laryngitis that lasts more than three weeks is known as chronic laryngitis. This type of laryngitis is generally caused by irritants over time. Chronic laryngitis can cause vocal cord strain and injuries or growths on the vocal cord (polyps or nodules). These injuries can be caused by: Inhaled irritants, such as chemical fumes, allergens or smoke Acid reflux , also called gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) Chronic sinusitis Excessive alcohol use Habitual overuse of your voice (such as with singers or cheerleaders) Smoking Less common causes of chronic laryngitis include: Bacterial or fungal infections Infections with certain parasites Other causes of chronic hoarseness include: Cancer Vocal cord paralysis, which can result from injury, stroke , a lung tumor or other health conditions Bowing of the vocal cords in old age&nbsp; Risk factors Risk factors for laryngitis include: Having a respiratory infection, such as a cold , bronchitis, or sinusitis Exposure to irritating substances, such as cigarette smoke, excessive alcohol , stomach acid , or workplace chemicals Overusing your voice, by speaking too much, speaking too loudly, shouting, or singing Complications In some cases of laryngitis caused by infection, the infection may spread to other parts of the respiratory tract. Diagnosis The most common sign of laryngitis is hoarseness. Changes in your voice can vary with the degree of infection or irritation, ranging from mild hoarseness to almost total loss of your voice. If you have chronic hoarseness, your doctor may want to listen to your voice and examine your vocal cords, and he or she may refer you to an ear, nose and throat specialist. These techniques are sometimes used to help diagnose laryngitis: Laryngoscopy . Your doctor can visually examine your vocal cords in a procedure called laryngoscopy, by using a light and a tiny mirror to look into the back of your throat. Or your doctor may use fiber-optic laryngoscopy. This involves inserting a thin, flexible tube (endoscope) with a tiny camera and light through your nose or mouth and into the back of your throat. Then your doctor can watch the motion of your vocal cords as you speak. Biopsy . If your doctor sees a suspicious area, he or she may do a biopsy — taking a sample of tissue for examination under a microscope. References http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/laryngitis/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://www.medicinenet.com/laryngitis/article.htm http://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/L/Laryngitis/ http://www.healthline.com/health/laryngitis-2 Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin