Medicine A-Z List | Lynch's Pharmacy | Promoting health literacy, Increasing patient compliance, Enhancing well-being Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Medicine A-Z List You are here: Home Medicine A-Z List Medicine A-Z At Lynch’s Pharmacy we provide all your prescription and over-the-counter drug information, both online and in-store. If you have any question regarding your medicine, click on the “live virtual-consultation” button, and talk to a Pharmacist, who is ready to answer your questions. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z All Famciclovir Fampyra (fampridin... Famvir - (Famciclo... Fastum Gel Faverin Tablets Feldene Femara Fematab Femodene Tablets Femoston 2/10 Femoston-Conti Fennel Fenofibrate Fer-In-Sol Ferrograd Tablets Feverfew Finasteride Tablet... Firmagon - (Degare... Flagyl Tablets Fleet Phospho Flixonase Nasal Sp... Flixotide Diskus Flixotide Evohaler Floxapen Capsules/... Fluanxol (Flupenti... Flucillin Capsules... Fluclon Capsules/S... Flucloxacillin Cap... Fluoxetine Flutiform inhaler FML Eye Drops Folic acid Forsteo Injection Forxiga (Dapaglifl... Fosamax Once Weekl... Fosavance 70mg/280... Fosavance 70mg/560... Fostepor Once Week... Frisium Frovex (frovatript... Frumil Tablets Fucibet Cream/Fuci... Fucidin Cream/Oint... Fucidin H Cream Fucithalmic Eye Dr... Furosemide Fybogel Sachets Fycompa Medicine - F Famciclovir Famciclovir is used to treat viral infections such as genital herpes (a sexually transmitted infection) and herpes zoster (shingles). It is also useful in preventing genital herpes and in preventing viral infections occurring in those with a lowered immune system. Fampyra (fampridine tablets) Fampyra is a medicine used to improve walking in adults (18 years and over) with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) related walking disability. In multiple sclerosis, inflammation destroys the protective sheath around the nerves leading to muscle weakness, muscle stiffness and difficulty walking. Fampyra contains the active substance fampridine which belongs to a group of medicines called potassium channel blockers. They work by stopping potassium leaving the nerve cells which have been damaged by MS. This medicine is thought to work by letting signals pass down the nerve more normally, which allows you to walk better. Famvir - (Famciclovir) Famvir is used to treat viral infections such as genital herpes (a sexually transmitted infection) and herpes zoster (shingles). It is also useful in preventing genital herpes and in preventing viral infections occurring in those with a lowered immune system. Fastum Gel Fastum Gel contains the active ingredient ketoprofen, which is a type of medicine called a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). NSAIDs are used to relieve pain and inflammation. Faverin Tablets Faverin belongs to a group of medicines called selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRI). Faverin contains a substance called Faverin. This is an antidepressant. It is used to treat depression (major depressive episode). Faverin can also treat people who have obsessive compulsive disorder-OCD Feldene Feldene (Piroxicam) is used to relieve some symptoms caused by rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis (arthrosis, degenerative joint disease) and ankylosing spondylitis (rheumatism of the spine) such as swelling, stiffness and joint pain. Femara Femara (Letrozole) is a drug used to treat breast cancer in post-menopausal women. It is a type of hormone treatment known as an aromatase inhibitor. Fematab Fematab tablets contain the active ingredient estradiol valerate, which is a naturally occuring form of the main female sex hormone, oestrogen. Femodene Tablets Femodene tablets are a type of hormonal contraception commonly known as 'the pill' or combined oral contraceptive pill. Femodene tablets contain two active ingredients, ethinylestradiol and gestodene. These are synthetic versions of the naturally occurring female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Ethinylestradiol is a synthetic version of oestrogen and gestodene is a 'third generation' synthetic form of progesterone. Femoston 2/10 Femoston is a hormone replacement therapy (HRT) preparation. It consists of two types of tablets; one containing the active ingredient estradiol, and the other containing two active ingredients, estradiol and dydrogesterone. These are forms of the main female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Estradiol is a naturally occuring form of oestrogen and dydrogesterone is a synthetic form of progesterone. Femoston-Conti Femoston-conti tablets contain two active ingredients, estradiol and dydrogesterone. These are forms of the main female sex hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. Estradiol is a naturally occuring form of oestrogen and dydrogesterone is a synthetic form of progesterone. Fennel For centuries, fennel fruits have been used as herbal medicines in Europe and China. Fennel tea is often used to treat infants with digestive disorders. It has a mild flavor and seems to be well-tolerated. An emulsion of.... Fenofibrate Fenofibrate is used to reduce the level of cholesterol and fats in your blood when a low-fat diet and other non-medicinal treatments, such as weight reduction or exercise, have failed. Lipantil Micro can often increase the amount of a “good” type of cholesterol, called HDL. Fer-In-Sol If your child isn't getting enough iron, your baby's doctor may recommend Enfamil Fer-In-Sol Iron drops: Scientifically formulated to meet your newborn, infant or toddler's supplementary iron needs One daily dropper of Fer-In-Sol provides 15 mg of elemental iron Use only as directed by your child's doctor Ferrograd Tablets Ferrograd tablets contain the active ingredient ferrous sulphate, which is a form of iron.&nbsp; Feverfew Feverfew is often taken by mouth for migraine headache prevention. Laboratory studies show that feverfew may reduce inflammation and prevent blood vessel constriction (squeezing) that may lead to headaches. Most of the available..... Finasteride Tablets Proscar prevents the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the body. DHT is involved in the development of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Firmagon - (Degarelix) Firmagon (Degarelix) is prescribed to treat advanced prostate cancer. Flagyl Tablets Flagyl is used for infections caused by anaerobic bacteria or micro-organisms called protozoa. It works by killing the bacteria or protozoa. Fleet Phospho Fleet phospho-soda oral solution contain two active ingredients, sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate and disodium phosphate dodecahydrate. Both of these are known as osmotic laxatives. Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin