Calcium, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Calcium You are here: Home Calcium Calcium, the most abundant mineral in the body, is found in some foods, added to others, available as a dietary supplement, and present in some medicines (such as antacids). There is more calcium in the body than any other mineral and it has several important functions. These include: helping build strong bones and teeth regulating muscle contractions, including heartbeat ensuring blood clots normally It is thought that calcium may help lower high blood pressure and protect against colon and breast cancer , although more evidence is needed to confirm this. A lack of calcium could lead to a condition called rickets in children or osteoporosis in later life. Good sources of calcium Good sources of calcium include: milk, cheese and other dairy foods green leafy vegetables, such as broccoli, cabbage and okra, but not spinach soya beans tofu soya drinks with added calcium nuts bread and anything made with fortified flour fish where you eat the bones, such as sardines and pilchards How much calcium do I need? Adults need 700mg of calcium a day. You should be able to get all the calcium you need from your daily diet. What happens if I take too much calcium? Taking high doses of calcium (over 1500mg a day) could lead to stomach pain and diarrhoea . &nbsp; What does the Department of Health advise? You should be able to get all the calcium you need by eating a varied and balanced diet. If you take calcium supplements, do not take too much. Taking 1,500mg or less a day is unlikely to cause any harm.&nbsp; References: http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/vitamins-minerals/Pages/Calcium.aspx http://www.webmd.com/vitamins-supplements/ingredientmono-781-CALCIUM.aspx?activeIngredientId=781&amp;activeIngredientName=CALCIUM http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional/ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium Read More &gt; Print This Page Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin