Penicillin allergy | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Penicillin allergy You are here: Home Penicillin allergy Penicillin allergy is an overreaction by your immune system to penicillin and related antibiotics. If you have a penicillin allergy, your reaction to taking the antibiotic may range from a rash to anaphylaxis, a potentially life-threatening condition. What is it? Penicillin allergy is an overreaction by your immune system to penicillin and related antibiotics. If you have a penicillin allergy, your reaction to taking the antibiotic may range from a rash to anaphylaxis , a potentially life-threatening condition. Penicillin allergy is the most common drug allergy. Penicillin antibiotics are widely prescribed for bacterial infections such as strep throat. However, not all unfavorable reactions to penicillin are a true penicillin allergy. It isn't clear why some people develop penicillin allergy. Once you've had an allergic reaction to penicillin, the simplest way to prevent penicillin allergy is to avoid penicillin and related antibiotics. Symptoms Many people who report having a penicillin allergy don't have a true allergy. They may have had a reaction to penicillin, such as certain types of rash, but not all reactions are allergies. Penicillin allergy symptoms include: Hives Rash Itchy skin Wheezing Swollen lips, tongue or face (angioedema) Anaphylactic reactions The most serious allergic reaction to penicillin is an anaphylactic response , which can be life-threatening. Anaphylactic reactions develop immediately after penicillin exposure in highly sensitive people. Signs and symptoms include: Difficulty breathing Wheezing Drop in blood pressure Swelling of the throat or tongue Dizziness Loss of consciousness Rapid or weak pulse Causes Penicillin allergy occurs when your immune system responds to the drug as if it were a harmful substance instead of a helpful remedy. Your immune system triggers certain cells to produce immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to fight the component of penicillin to which you're allergic (allergen). Chemicals released by your immune cells can cause the signs and symptoms associated with an allergic reaction. Penicillin belongs to a family of drugs called beta-lactam antibiotics. These drugs include penicillin and amoxicillin , which are relatively inexpensive and effective at treating many common bacterial infections. Such infections include skin, ear, sinus and upper respiratory infections. Taken orally or injected, penicillin works by stopping the growth of bacteria in your body. Several varieties of penicillin exist, and each targets a different infection in a different part of your body. You may have heard of some of the other drugs in the penicillin family, including: Amoxicillin Ampicillin Dicloxacillin Penicillin V If you're allergic to one type of penicillin, you're at risk of being allergic to all penicillin-related antibiotics. Some people allergic to penicillin may also be allergic to cephalosporins, a class of antibiotics closely related to penicillin. You aren't born allergic to penicillin, but you can develop penicillin allergy once you've been exposed to the drug. After that, re-exposure to penicillin or related antibiotics can trigger an allergic reaction, sometimes more severe than the reaction to the first exposure. Risk factors It isn't clear why some people develop penicillin allergies while others don't. However, certain people seem to be at greater risk of developing a penicillin allergy than others are. You may be at higher risk if: You're between the ages of 20 and 49 You've taken penicillin frequently You have HIV/AIDS You have cystic fibrosis You've had allergic reactions to penicillin or another drug in the past Diagnosis Your doctor will want to know about your past reactions to penicillin and may examine you to identify or exclude other medical problems. Unless you require penicillin — either because it's the only effective antibiotic for a life-threatening condition or because you're allergic to other antibiotics and have few treatment options — your doctor may prescribe another antibiotic. Your doctor may recommend you be tested for penicillin allergy if: You were allergic to penicillin in the past, but possibly are no longer sensitive to the drug You require penicillin for treatment Your doctor wants to keep you from taking a stronger antibiotic than your condition requires Because of the risk of anaphylaxis, testing for penicillin allergy should only be done by an allergist in a hospital or doctor's office. Skin test This test, which can determine your sensitivity to the drug, involves the following: A small amount of penicillin is injected into the skin of your forearm or back. If you're allergic to the particular substance being tested, you develop a red, raised bump or reaction. If the skin tests to penicillin are negative, your doctor may recommend penicillin or a related antibiotic. If the skin test to penicillin is positive, most likely your doctor will recommend that you continue to avoid penicillin and related antibiotics.&nbsp; References http://www.webmd.com/allergies/guide/penicillin-allergy-topic-overview http://acaai.org/allergies/types/drug-allergies http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Antibiotics-penicillins/Pages/Side-effects.aspx http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/penicillin-allergy.htm http://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/learning/learning-article/penicillin-allergy-identification-and-management/20069170.article Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Clarityn allergy tablets (Loratadine) Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin