Periodontitis | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Periodontitis You are here: Home Periodontitis Periodontitis is a serious gum infection that destroys the soft tissue and bone that support your teeth. Periodontitis can cause tooth loss or worse, an increased risk of heart attack or stroke and other serious health problems. What is it? Periodontitis is a serious gum infection that destroys the soft tissue and bone that support your teeth. Periodontitis can cause tooth loss or worse, an increased risk of heart attack or stroke and other serious health problems. Periodontitis is common but largely preventable. Periodontitis is usually the result of poor oral hygiene. Daily brushing and flossing and regular professional dental cleanings can greatly reduce your chance of developing periodontitis. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of periodontitis can include: Swollen gums Bright red or purplish gums Gums that feel tender when touched Gums that pull away from your teeth (recede), making your teeth look longer than normal New spaces developing between your teeth Pus between your teeth and gums Bad breath Bad taste in your mouth Loose teeth A change in the way your teeth fit together when you bite There are different types, or classes, of periodontitis. The most common class is chronic periodontitis — the typical type that most adults older than age 35 have. Periodontitis that begins in childhood or early adulthood is called aggressive periodontitis. Causes It's thought that periodontitis begins with plaque. This invisible, sticky film is composed mainly of bacteria. Plaque forms on your teeth when starches and sugars in food interact with bacteria normally found in your mouth. Brushing your teeth removes plaque. But plaque re-forms quickly, usually within 24 hours. Plaque that stays on your teeth longer than two or three days can harden under your gumline into tartar (calculus). Tartar makes plaque more difficult to remove and acts as a reservoir for bacteria. What's more, you usually can't get rid of tartar by brushing and flossing — you need a professional dental cleaning to remove it. The longer plaque and tartar remain on your teeth, the more damage they can do. Initially, they may simply irritate and inflame the gingiva, the part of your gum around the base of your teeth. This is gingivitis, the mildest form of periodontal disease. But ongoing inflammation eventually causes pockets to develop between your gums and teeth that fill with plaque, tartar and bacteria. In time, these pockets become deeper and more bacteria accumulate, eventually advancing under your gum tissue. These deep infections cause a loss of tissue and bone. If too much bone is destroyed, you may lose one or more teeth. Not everyone with extensive plaque and tartar develop periodontitis, though. Some research suggests that periodontitis occurs not simply from plaque but when the type of bacteria in your mouth changes, becoming more destructive. Risk factors Factors that can increase your risk of periodontitis include: Gingivitis Heredity Poor oral health habits Tobacco use Diabetes Older age Decreased immunity, such as that occurring with leukemia or HIV/AIDS Poor nutrition Certain medications Hormonal changes, such as those related to pregnancy Substance abuseIll-fitting dental restorations Lower socioeconomic status Complications Complications that periodontitis can cause or be associated with include: Tooth loss Coronary artery disease Stroke Low birth weight babies Poorly controlled diabetes Respiratory problems Some of these complications may come as a surprise. But research suggests that the bacteria responsible for periodontitis can travel through your bloodstream, affecting many parts of your body. For instance, bacteria may travel to the arteries in your heart. There, they can trigger a cycle of inflammation and arterial narrowing that contributes to heart attacks. Diagnosis Diagnosis of periodontitis is generally simple. Diagnosis is based on your description of symptoms and an exam of your mouth. Your dentist will look for plaque and tartar buildup and check for easy bleeding. To check the health of your gum tissue, your dentist may use a metal probe to measure the depth of the gingival sulcus, the groove between your gums and your teeth. The probe is inserted beside your tooth beneath your gumline, usually at several sites throughout your mouth. The measurements can help determine how severe your periodontitis is. References http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/periodontitis/basics/definition/con-20021679 http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Gum-disease/Pages/Introduction.aspx https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/G/Gingivitis-and-periodontitis/Treating-gum-disease.html http://www.webmd.com/oral-health/guide/gingivitis-periodontal-disease Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Oral Hygiene Medicine Reference Ibuprofen - (Nurofen) Paracetamol Amoxicillin Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin