Amlodipine tablets, Lynchs Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Amlodipine You are here: Home Amlodipine Amlodipine is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) or a certain type of chest pain called angina, a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. Why have I been prescribed Amlodipine? Amlodipine is used to treat high blood pressure ( hypertension ) or a certain type of chest pain called angina , a rare form of which is Prinzmetal’s or variant angina. How does it work? In patients with high blood pressure your medicine works by relaxing blood vessels, so that blood passes through them more easily. In patients with angina. Amlodipine works by improving blood supply to the heart muscle which then receives more oxygen and as a result chest pain is prevented and relieved. Your medicine does not provide immediate relief of chest pain from angina. When and how do I take it? It is best to take your medicine at the same time each day with a drink of water.&nbsp;It can be taken before or after food. What’s the dose? The usual dose of Amlodipine is one tablet daily. Could it interact with other tablets? Amlodipine is not known to significantly interact with any other medicines bu please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription. Herbal supplements should be used with caution and only after informing your doctor first. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Like all medicines, Amlodipine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms after taking this medicine. Although they are very rare, the symptoms can be severe. Sudden wheeziness, difficulty in breathing, swelling of eyelids, face or lips, rash or&nbsp;itching (especially affecting the whole body). The following Common side-effects have been reported. If any of these cause you problems or if they last for more than one week, you should contact your doctor. Common side-effects: Headache , dizziness, sleepiness. Palpitations (awareness of your heart beat), flushing. Abdominal pain, feeling sick (nausea). Ankle swelling (oedema), tiredness. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Amlodipine. Always ask your doctor/pharmacist however as this may depend on what other tablets you are taking. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? Amlid should not be given during pregnancy or while breast feeding. If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note: &nbsp;We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular References: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amlodipine https://www.hpra.ie/img/uploaded/swedocuments/LicenseSPC_PA0281-122-002_08032012135058.pdf http://www.drugs.com/international/amlid.html &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Hypertension , Angina Print This Page More Videos... What is Angina Health Reference Hypertension Angina Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin