Dioralite, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Dioralyte You are here: Home Dioralyte This medicine helps to replace fluids lost as a result of acute diarrhoea. What is Dioralyte used for? Replacing fluids and electrolytes lost as a result of acute diarrhoea. This is particularly important for frail and elderly people and children with diarrhoea, who can easily become very ill due to dehydration. How does Dioralyte work? Dioralyte sachets contain rehydration salts, which consist of sugar (glucose) and electrolytes (sodium chloride, potassium chloride and disodium hydrogen citrate). Diarrhoea makes you lose more fluids and electrolytes (salts such as sodium and potassium) than you usually would and can make you dehydrated. Taking Dioralyte helps rehydrate you. The contents of Dioralyte sachets are dissolved in water to provides the fluid replacement. The glucose in the sachets helps the water and electrolytes to be absorbed from the intestines. How do I take Dioralyte? Adults (including elderly people) should take one or two sachets dissolved in water (see below) after each loose bowel movement. Children aged two years and over should be given one sachet dissolved in water (see below) after each loose bowel movement. Infants under two years of age should be given this medicine under medical advice. Your doctor will work out how much to give your baby based on their body weight, and you initially give the baby Dioralyte solution instead of feeds over the course of the day. The volume of Dioralyte solution that the doctor will usually recommend you give over 24 hours is one to one and a half times the volume of fluid the baby would usually drink in 24 hours. Always follow the instructions given by your doctor. Initially, if you're bottle-feeding or giving other foods this should be stopped. If you're breastfeeding you should give the Dioralyte solution before each feed and then offer the baby the breast. The baby may need less breast milk while they are having Dioralyte as well, so you may need to express some milk. If you're being sick, take the medicine in small sips. It's best not to eat in the early stages of diarrhoea. After 24 to 48 hours, as the diarrhoea improves, you can start to gradually re-introduce food (or formula for bottle-fed babies). If the diarrhoea lasts for longer than 24 to 48 hours you should consult your doctor. How do I dissolve the contents Dioralyte sachets? To make up the Dioralyte solution, use 200ml water to dissolve the contents of each sachet. For adults and children over one year of age use fresh drinking water. For babies under one year of age, or if fresh drinking water is not available, use 200ml of freshly boiled and cooled water to dissolve each sachet. Don't dissolve the sachets in anything other than water. Always use exactly 200ml to dissolve the contents of each sachet. Don't use more or less water than this, as this will make the solution too strong or too weak and can upset the balance of salts in your body. Dioralyte solution should be made up immediately before use and used within one hour. If you don't use it within one hour (for instance if you're giving it to a baby over the course of the day) you should keep it in a fridge, in which case it may be kept for up to 24 hours. When should I see a doctor? People with any of the problems listed below should consult a doctor, because diarrhoea should be treated under medical advice in these cases: People with kidney disease (including people who are producing very small amounts of urine or no urine). People with liver disease. People with diabetes. People on a low sodium or potassium diet. People who cannot drink or keep down fluids taken by mouth. People with severe or persistent diarrhoea and vomiting (lasting more than 24 to 48 hours) Babies with severe diarrhoea and/or vomiting should be seen by a doctor as soon as possible. Who should not take Dioralyte? People with a blockage in the stomach or intestines. People who are allergic or intolerant to any ingredient of the medicine. Check the ingredients in the leaflet that comes with Dioralyte sachets if you know you have specific allergies or intolerances. Can I take Dioralyte while pregnant or breastfeeding? Yes - Dioralyte can be used safely during pregnancy and breastfeeding. What are the possible side effects of Dioralyte? Medicines and their possible side effects can affect individual people in different ways. However, no side effects are expected from taking Dioralyte solution. For more information about any other possible risks associated with Dioralyte, please read the information provided with the medicine or ask your doctor or pharmacist. References: https://www.dioralyte.co.uk http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/medicines/digestive-health/a6583/dioralyte-rehydration-salts/ &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Dehydration Print This Page More Videos... Diarrhoea Treatment Diarrhoea Health Reference Dehydration Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin