Aqueous Cream, Lynch's Pharmacy Douglas, Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Aqueous Cream You are here: Home Aqueous Cream Aqueous cream is used for the relief of the symptoms of dry skin conditions. Why have I been prescribed Aqueous Cream? Aqueous cream is used for the relief of the symptoms of dry skin conditions. How does it work? Aqueous cream works by locking moisture into the skin and keeping it hydrated. When and how do I use it? Apply to the skin when you need to. It needs to be applied regularly and liberally. This cream may also be used instead of soap to wash the skin. For use on the skin only. What’s the dose? Apply as needed as directed by your Doctor. Could it interact with other tablets? There are no known interactions between Aqueous Cream and other medications. Herbal products should only be taken after talking with your doctor. What are the possible risks or side-effects? Most people will not have problems, but some may get some of these: Occasional allergic reactions (e.g. skin rash, red or itchy skin ) If any side effect becomes severe, or you notice any side effect not listed here, please tell your pharmacist or doctor. Can I drink alcohol while taking it? There are no known interactions between alcohol and Aqueous Cream. Always ask you doctor or pharmacist however as other medications you are taking may have a bearing on this. What if I’m pregnant/breastfeeding? You can use this medicine if you are pregnant or breastfeeding. &nbsp; If you have any more questions please ask your Pharmacist. Remember to keep all medicines out of reach of children Please Note : We have made every effort to ensure that the content of this information sheet is correct at time of publish, but remember that information about drugs may change. This sheet does not list all the uses and side-effects associated with this drug. For full details please see the drug information leaflet which comes with your medicine. Your doctor will assess your medical circumstances and draw your attention to any information or side-effects which may be relevant in your particular case. References: https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/aqueous-cream-may-cause-skin-irritation https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aqueous_cream Read More &gt; Health Reference : Eczema , Psoriasis , Itchy skin , Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Print This Page More Videos... Eczema - (Contact Eczema) Health Reference Eczema Psoriasis Itchy skin Atopic dermatitis (Eczema) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin