Autism | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Autism You are here: Home Autism There are many developmental problems that can affect children growing up, one of the most serious is Autism. What is it? There are a group of serious developmental problems called Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). These appear in early childhood — usually before age 3. Autism&nbsp;is one of these. Autism disorders&nbsp;affect a child's ability to communicate and interact with others. How do I recognise it? Social interaction, language and behavior are the three main areas that autism&nbsp;patients have serious difficulty with. Autism symptoms&nbsp;vary greatly and children with the condition can appear very different. Social skills Fails to respond to his or her name Has poor eye contact Appears not to hear you at times Resists cuddling and holding Appears unaware of others' feelings Seems to prefer playing alone — retreats into his or her "own world" Language Starts talking later than age 2, and has other developmental delays by 30 months Loses previously acquired ability to say words or sentences Doesn't make eye contact when making requests Speaks with an abnormal tone or rhythm — may use a singsong voice or robot-like speech Can't start a conversation or keep one going May repeat words or phrases verbatim, but doesn't understand how to use them Behavior Performs repetitive movements, such as rocking, spinning or hand-flapping Develops specific routines or rituals Becomes disturbed at the slightest change in routines or rituals Moves constantly May be fascinated by parts of an object, such as the spinning wheels of a toy car May be unusually sensitive to light, sound and touch and yet oblivious to pain Causes There is no single known cause. It is a complex and not well understood and probably due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. How do you treat it? Like any disease, even if there is no cure, there is almost always something you can do to manage it and take control. There are three main areas involved in the treatment of any disease: Conventional medicines Complementary medicines Complementary therapies For information on medicines and therapies relevant to Autism, make an appointment at Lynch's Pharmacy, Broadale, Douglas, Cork on 021-4366923. Learn all about the drugs used to treat the disease and any complementary medicines or therapies proven to help. Equip yourself with the tools to manage the condition and not be managed by it. How do you live with it? Certain adjustments may be needed to get on with your life, and often, some simple tips and advice can go a long way to making these changes.&nbsp; We give you all the information available to make your life easier and enable you to better live with your condition. References Autism-http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autism Autism, a comprehensive overview- http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/search/search Autism, information for patients, http://www.cks.nhs.uk/patient_information_leaflet/autistic_spectrum_disorder/adults_with_autism Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Amitriptyline Anafranil Ciprager Tablets - Citalopram Cipramil Tablets - Citalopram Cymbalta Capsules Dolmatil Tablets Edronax Efexor Capsules - Venlafaxine Efexor XL Capsules Faverin Tablets Fluanxol (Flupentixol) Imipramine Lexapro Tablets Lustral Tablets Manerix Mianserin Molipaxin Capsules Nardil Tablets Optimax Capsules Prothiaden Tablets/Capsules Serenace Tablets Seroxat Tablets - (Paroxetine) Surmontil Capsules Zispin Tablets - (Mirtazapine) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin