Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Cariban Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Cariban 10mg/10mg Capsules You are here: Home Cariban 10mg/10mg Capsules Symptomatic treatment of nausea and vomiting. How to take Cariban? Adults and children over 12 years of age: 1 capsule/8 h, up to a maximum of 70 mg per day (equivalent to 7 capsules). Pregnant women: if the nausea occurs in the morning, take two capsules upon going to bed. If the nausea occurs during the day, take one capsule in the morning and another in the afternoon. Contraindications Hypersensitivity to the active substances or to any of the excipients Hypersensitivity reactions to any other H1 antihistamine Asthma attacks Porphyria Precautions for use The suitability of treating patients with the following must be evaluated: Glaucoma, pyloroduodenal obstruction, intestinal obstruction, stenosing peptic ulcer, urinary bladder obstruction, symptomatic prostate hypertrophy, urinary retention, hyperthyroidism, cardiovascular alterations and hypertension as the anticholinergic effects of this medicinal product may worsen these conditions. Lower respiratory tract disease, such as asthma, pulmonary emphysema or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It has been demonstrated that antihistamines reduce the volume of bronchial secretions and increase their viscosity, thereby making bronchial expectoration more difficult. This may result in respiratory obstruction, which could worsen these conditions. As such, care should be taken in these patients. Moderate or severe renal impairment Hepatic impairment, dose adjustment may be necessary Photosensitivity reactions: As an increased sensitivity of the skin to sunlight, with photodermatitis, has been observed with some antihistamines, sunbathing should be avoided during treatment. The antiemetic effect of Cariban may interfere in the diagnosis of appendicitis. As it may mask symptoms of ototoxicity (such as tinnitus and dizziness), Cariban must be administered with care in patients treated concomitantly with potentially ototoxic medications. Care should be taken in epileptic patients as antihistamines have occasionally been associated with paradoxical hyperexcitability reactions, even at therapeutic doses. Interaction Cariban presents the following interactions: Anticholinergic agents (tricyclic antidepressants, MAOI, neuroleptics): may enhance toxicity due to the addition of their anticholinergic effects. Sedatives (barbiturates, benzodiazepines, antipsychotic agents, opiod analgesics): may enhance the hypnotic action Ethyl alcohol: enhanced toxicity, with altered intellectual and psychomotor capacity, has been reported in some studies. The mechanism has not been established. The anticholinergic effects of this medicinal product could lead to false negatives in dermal hypersensitivity tests with antigen extracts. Suspending treatment at least 72 hours before the event is recommended. Fertility, pregnancy and lactation Numerous epidemiological studies which indicate that Cariban does not exert adverse effects on gestational development or on the health of the foetus or newborn have been performed. Epidemiological evidence concerning its possible association with congenital malformations has been summarised in two meta-analyses. The first of these gave an OR for any congenital defect of 1.01 (95% CI: 0.66-1.55) and the second an OR of 0.95 (95% CI: 0.88-1.04). As such, both conclude that Cariban is not associated with an increased malformation rate. Consequently, Cariban may be used safely during pregnancy when indicated. Although pyridoxine is not toxic at the recommended dose, chronic administration at high doses may cause neurotoxicity. Pyridoxal (the active form of pyridoxine) crosses the placental barrier, reaching foetal plasma concentrations 5 times higher than those in the mother. Effects on ability to drive and use machines The influence of Cariban on the ability to drive and operate machinery is significant. This medicinal product may cause drowsiness, especially during the first few days of treatment, therefore situations that require a special level of alertness, such as driving vehicles or using hazardous machinery, must be avoided during treatment. Undesirable effects The following definitions are applicable to the incidence of adverse reactions: Very common (≥1/10); common (≥1/100, &lt;1/10); uncommon (≥1/1000, &lt;1/100); rare (≥1/10,000, &lt; 1/1000), very rare (&lt;1/10,000). The undesirable events are listed in descending order of severity within each degree of frequency. The following adverse reactions have been reported after the administration of Cariban: General disorders: Uncommon: asthenia Cardiovascular disorders: Uncommon: orthostatic hypotension, peripheral oedema Blood disorders: Rare: haemolytic anaemia Gastrointestinal disorders: Common: dry mouth, constipation Uncommon: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea. Nervous system disorders: Common: drowsiness, especially upon commencing treatment, which usually decreases after 2-3 days. Uncommon: confusion Rare: tremor, seizures, paradoxical excitation, especially in children and the elderly Ear and labyrinth disorders: Uncommon: tinnitus Renal and urinary disorders: Common: urinary retention Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders: Common: bronchial hypersecretion Eye disorders: Common: blurred vision Uncommon: diplopia, glaucoma Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: Uncommon: exanthematous rash, photosensitivity reactions The adverse reactions mentioned above arise due to the action of doxylamine succinate as pyridoxine hydrochloride does not present side-effects, although chronic administration at high doses has been associated with neurotoxicity. Special precautions for storage No special storage conditions are required. References: http://inibsa.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/FT-Cariban-10-mg-10-ml-EN.pdf https://inibsa.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/En-spc-V1.pdf &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Read More &gt; Health Reference : Morning sickness Print This Page Health Reference Morning sickness Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin