Jaundice | Lynch's Pharmacy Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Jaundice You are here: Home Jaundice Jaundice is a term used to describe the yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes. It&#039;s caused by a build-up of a substance called bilirubin in the blood and tissues of the body. Signs of jaundice The most common signs of jaundice are: yellowing of the skin, eyes and mucous membrane (the lining of the body’s passageways and cavities, such as the mouth and nose) pale coloured stools (faeces) dark coloured urine When to seek medical advice Always seek immediate medical advice if you develop the above signs of jaundice. They are an important warning sign that something is wrong with the normal processes of your body. Speak to your GP as soon as possible. Types of jaundice There are three types of jaundice, depending on what is causing disruption to the normal removal of bilirubin from the body. The three main types of jaundice are described below. Pre-hepatic jaundice – the disruption occurs before the bilirubin has been transported from the blood to the liver. This is caused by conditions such as sickle cell anaemia and haemolytic anaemia . Intra-hepatic jaundice (also known as hepatocellular jaundice) – the disruption occurs inside the liver. This is caused by conditions such as Gilbert’s syndrome, cirrhosis or other liver damage. Post-hepatic jaundice (also known as obstructive jaundice) – the disruption prevents the bile (and the bilirubin inside it) from draining out of the gallbladder and into the digestive system. This is caused by conditions such as gallstones or tumours. Who's at risk Intra-hepatic and post-hepatic jaundice are more common in middle-aged and elderly people than in the young. Pre-hepatic jaundice can affect people of all ages, including children. Certain lifestyle changes may help to prevent jaundice. For example, maintaining a healthy weight, managing how much alcohol you drink and minimising your risk of hepatitis. Treating jaundice Treatment for jaundice in adults and older children depends on the underlying condition that's causing it. Following tests to determine the cause of jaundice, the appropriate treatment will be recommended. References: http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Jaundice/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaundice http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Jaundice-newborn/Pages/Introduction.aspx http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/jaundice.html http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/infant-jaundice/DS00107 http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/Jaundice_in_babies Read More &gt; Print This Page Medicine Reference Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin