Lynchs Pharmacy, Broadale, Parkinsonism Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Search Search Home Medicine A-Z Health A-Z Video Series Asthma Diabetes Alzheimers Blog Health In The News Contact Health In The News Learn more about your health or illness with our health video series. Please read our policy and consent to Marketing and Preferences cookies by clicking the icon on bottom left corner to view YouTube videos Cough Treatment Types of coughs Cold &amp; Flu More Health in The News videos &nbsp; Message us with your health query Parkinsonism You are here: Home Parkinsonism Parkinsonism refers to any condition that causes a combination of the movement abnormalities seen in Parkinson&#039;s disease — such as tremors, slow movement, impaired speech or muscle stiffness — resulting from the loss of dopamine-containing nerve cells (neurons). What is it? Parkinsonism refers to any condition that causes a combination of the movement abnormalities seen in Parkinson's disease — such as tremors, slow movement, impaired speech or muscle stiffness — resulting from the loss of dopamine-containing nerve cells (neurons). Not everyone who has parkinsonism has Parkinson's disease. Other causes of parkinsonism include: Lewy body dementia Stroke Encephalitis, inflammation of the brain usually caused by infection Progressive supranuclear palsy, a rare degenerative brain disorder Multiple system atrophy, a degenerative disorder that destroys nerve tissue Corticobasal degeneration, a rare neurological disease Certain medications, such as some antipsychotics and metoclopramide Head trauma, isolated or repeated, such as injuries sustained in boxing No definitive tests exist for parkinsonism or Parkinson's disease. A diagnosis is usually based on your medical history, observations of signs of the condition and a neurological exam. In the early stages of the disease, it may be difficult to know if parkinsonism is due to Parkinson's disease or another condition that mimics it. The development of additional signs and symptoms, the response to medical treatment, and the progression of the disease may establish the correct diagnosis. Treatment of parkinsonism is directed at the underlying cause when possible and may include medication to manage the signs and symptoms. Read More &gt; Print This Page More Videos... Azilect Tablets Cabaser (Cabergoline) Akineton Tablets (Biperiden) Comtess (Entacapone) Tablets Celance (Pergolide) Tablets Medicine Reference Akineton - (Biperiden) Order Your Prescription Pre-order your prescription online now We'll text you when it's ready to collect at our Pharmacy! Order Your Prescription Search Search BLOG 12 Dec Advice on Pfizer&#039;s COVID 19 Vaccine Dec 12, 20 So first: what is a vaccine? a vaccine teaches our immune system how to create antibodies, and it is these antibodies that protect people from disease. It is much safer for our... Read more 17 Oct 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT Oct 17, 20 5 CAUSES OF ADULT ACNE AND HOW TO TREAT IT This article is originally posted on Proven Skincare. When you’re a teenager, self-conscious and unsure, acne can weigh on your self-... Read more CONTACT US Opening Hours: Monday - Friday: 9 am - 6 pm Saturday: 10am - 12noon Phone: 021 4366923 Email: garvanjames@gmail.com Address: Lynch's Pharmacy Broadale, Maryborough Hill, Douglas, Cork Ireland T12CX72 FOLLOW US WHO WE ARE Lynch’s Pharmacy is one of the last remaining, truly independent pharmacies in Cork. Based in Broadale, Douglas, we have over 20 years experience working in the community pharmacy sector. Read More HEALTH LITERACY FRIENDLY POLICY Nearly half of all Irish people have inadequate and problematic health literacy skills. Limited health literacy is very common. Read about our Health Literacy Policy here... Read More &nbsp; © 2023 Lynch’s Pharmacy. All rights reserved. | Privacy Notice | Cookies | Admin